Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report 
2021–22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(TM-Trademark registration pending) 
 
PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS AUTHORITY 
(A Statutory Authority Created by an Act of Parliament)  
Facilitated by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
NASC Complex, DPS Marg, New Delhi-110012  
www.plantauthority.gov.in  
 
TM 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Contents  
 
S. No. Topic Pg. No. 
 Preface  i 
 Acknowledgements  vii 
 Executive summary  viii 
1 Introduction  1 
2 Plant Varieties Registry  9 
3 DUS Test Centres  36 
4 Projects on the Development of DUS Test Guidelines and Establishment of 
Gene Banks  221 
5 Activities Related to Farmers  237 
6 Plant Variety Journal of India, National Register of Plant Varieties and 
Publications of the Authority  245 
7 Development of Databases, IINDUS, NORV and Website and Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT)  247 
8 Administration, Governance and other Miscellaneous Actitvities  254 
9 Financial Statements of the Authority  as on 31.03.2022  265 
10 Citizens’ Charter  272 
 Annexures   
I Members of PPVFR Authority (as on 31 March, 2022)  274 
II Details of Human Resources of PPVFR Authority (as on 31 March, 2022) 276 
III Statement showing Funds released to New Dus Centres/Projects during 
2021-22 277 
IV Statement showing Funds released to existing Dus Centres/Projects during 
2021-22 279 
V Statement showing funds released to Field Gene Banks during 2021–22 284 
VI Statement Showing Funds Released to the Organisation/Centre for Training 
& Awareness during 2021 -22. 285 
VII Crops under Registration  286 
VIII Certificates of registration issued during 2021 –22 291 
IX Acronyms  312 
 
 
  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 i 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
The year 2021-22 was free from COVID-19 restrictions of the kind that had prevented 
normal functioning and the Authority performed to its capacity coping with the process of 
registration, receiving applications for new and extant varieties, conducting testing and the other 
activities releated. However, the receipt of seed materials from the previous season’s harvest 
which is a mandatory part of applications for registration remained a constraint with many a plant 
breeder that led to a slight slack paced submission of applications during the period 2021-22. 
Compared to 396 applications of 2020-21, this period received 311 applications under various 
categories Owing to timely receipt in terms of respective sowing season of the crop plant 
concerned, it was possible to initiate the process with all the varieties in respective seasons, 
applications for the registration of which were submitted. The Authority gratefully acknowledges 
the undaunted spirit displayed by the concerned staff engaged for the purpose at the Authority a 
well as all the Principal Investigators along with their team of Senior Research Fellows at more 
than 160 DUS centers completed the recording of observations at different DUS testing sites in the 
country in time. This promptness has enabled the Authority to showcase a separate order of 
sequence being followed with specific time-cut off for each activity to be observed by both 
applicants in replying to quries and registry to seek or analyse information made available, so that 
there is an predictability for the outcome of every application made or queries settled before 
registration.  
 
In the recently concluded Governing Body Meeting of the  International Treaty on Plant 
Genetic Resources in Food and Agriculture, FAO (ITPGRFA) during 19-25 September 2022 in 
New  Delhi (though the period does not fall in the relevant reported period), it became obvious 
that due to the overwhelming influence of UPOV, Geneva the IPR regulatory Authorities in the 
member countries of ITPGRFA have not been providing the rights of farmers as per Article 9 ot 
the ITPGRFA Agreement, though it is a binding agreement. This unique leadership PPVFRA with 
the support of the Government of India has shown in the implementation of farmers’ rights is an 
enriching and globally perfectly relevant learning experience that all the other common member 
countries of ITPGRFA and TRIPS need to follow irrespective of their being developed or 
developing or under-developed. It is hightime UPOV made special efforts not to ignore under the 
clause of ‘national government responsibility” the implementation of farmers’ rights to sow, 
resow, use, share, exchange or sell as farm produce the seed or propagule of the variety protected 
under plant breeders’ rights. This Authority has demonstratively confirmed that the farmers rights 
as provided under ITPGRFA Agreement as well as under PPVFR Act (2001) are non-overlapping 
and can perfectly co-exist within the provisions, making it a win-win situation. The Authority has 
offered with the consent of the Government of India to organize during 2023 a global workshop 
seminar on the various issues bothering countries  in implementing farmers rights along with 
breeders rights on the new plant varieties.    
 
After having clarified the distinctions among authorised person, licensee and agent for the 
execution of one or many or all of plant breeders’ rights on a variety, the Authority has 
encouraged all right holder plant breeders to accordingly have information on each authorised 
person or registration of each licensee or agent appointed by them. One of the most gratifying 
consequences of this initiation is the registration of a few agents or licensees by some farmers who 
had their varieties registered under the category of farmers’ varieties. This signifies the rising 
awareness among farmers to move over to a business mode in harnessing the potential of IPR on 
their varieties.  
 
  Preface  
Annual Report 2021 -22 ii 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
I am pleased to put on record that the farmers who have been granted the plant breeders’ 
rights on their varieties have now come off tradition to work on business mode like any other seed 
industry by appointing licensed seed producers and marketing agents to market the seed of their 
varieties so that they can expand the market for their variety. This is the change in enabling 
farmers in exercising their rights for their socio-economic growth. Some have even started 
exporting their varieties after getting due registration for protection of their rights on the variety.  
 
 . In the past, farmers varieties used to be communicated by the Panchayat or State 
Agriculture officers for registration which were in large number like around 40-50% of total 
applications. Almost 80-90% of these used to be heterogenous mixtures with genetic impurity 
beyond acceptable levels and invariably get rejected. Since a public notice followed by directions 
issued to all ICAR, SAU and Central or State Government owned crop research institutions in 
2020, the Registry started redirecting the farmers as above to go back to the ICAR/SAU/Central or 
State Government crop research set up in their area to deposit their seed with the Application duly 
forwarded by the Panchayat. The latter organizations would accept those varieties and assign to a 
breeder expert for raising at least one generation in interaction with the farmer to establish or 
purify for genetic homogeneity. The Authority would cover the cost for such exercise including 
hiring a technical expert if an expert is not available in the organization. This exercise has now 
reduced submission of non-descript varieties while has almost led to nearly 100% acceptability of 
the farmers’ varieties now being forwarded by the organization’s  research lead. Though the 
number would get reduced, the chance of successful registration would increase multi-fold unlike 
in the past.      
 
Over the last four years, an attempt was made in 2018 to fully streamline every activity 
from the moment of receiving an application till its logical final decision. I am pleased to note that 
within three years, 387 varieties out of about 1100 applications were successfully given final 
decisions on. For an Authority that grants the rights on the claims of varieties after generation of 
its own data rather than comparing with other IPR granting authorities, this is a significant time-
line based predictability introduced in the process of registration.  
 
I also see that I have no option but to record my anguish about the shortage of qualified 
staff whose need is getting more and more critical with piling applications and pendency increase. 
The positions of Registrars, Joint Registrars and Deputy Registrars have to be upgraded to level 
14, 13 and 12 respectively from the current levels of 13, 12 and 11 respectively on the VII Pay 
Commission framework. The Authority has advertised five times since 2020 with not a single 
aspirant applying for the position of Registar other than one applicant already in the level 13 in a 
State Department. This is so because all the eligible plant breeder or horticulture researchers in 
ICAR, CSIR, ICFR, SAUs, CAUs would be already in either level 14 as Principal Scientists or 
above level 13a as Senior Scientists, thus making almost every eligible person overqualified to 
apply for the position of Registrar. It is the same fate with Joint Registrar as well as Deputy 
Registar. As such to expect that any practiing plant breeder would be willing to join on deputation 
showing no conflict of interest in favour of his parent organization would be unnatural and 
extremely dangerous when the position has full judicial powers to issue orders and seek evidences, 
etc., with every action in process of registration being a judicial procedure. All the positions of the 
Registry mentioned above therefore have to be permanent and by direct recruitment so that there is 
no conflict of interest and competitive influence in making the judicial orders or deciding on the 
fate of an application for protecton of plant breeder’s right on the variety. The matter has been put 
up to the Government which is yet to materialise as few amendments in the recruitment rules, 
Rules 2003 and Regulations 2006 would be required to effect this. At the time of filing this 
Report, there is NOT EVEN ONE REGISTRAR in position, the position that has most executive 
Annual Report 2021 -22 iii 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 responsibility of implementing the Act for registrtion of the plant varieties. If the same position 
continues, one Registrar General will not be able to handle even one tenth of the workload 
currently pending. This would be my anguish still not resolved as it is the responsibility of the 
Government to give approval before the Registrars are appointed.  
 
It is matter of urgency that required upgraded positions are to be provided as soon as 
possible as the Authority’s procedures of registration and balancing both plant breeder’s rights 
with that of farmers’ rights on every variety have now been brought to the global attention in the 
UPOV related international meetings in the Ministry of Commerce or during the Governing Body 
Meeting of ITPGRFA where the Authority showcased its revised mechanisms of registration and 
grant of protection based on the genetic nature of the variety applied for. It is a matter of pride that 
the Indian Authroity has been able to impress on the UPOV system about the ambiguities not 
being considered in genetical terms under the Techincal guidelines of UPOV. Some member 
countries of UPOV are understood to be now considering these view points in their national 
legislations or statutes, as has been requested by the Internatonal Seed Federation at the Annual 
Meetings of UPOV 2022 to be considered for discussion/interpretation.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I am grateful to the Hon’ble Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Sh. 
Narendra Singh Tomar and his office for providing all encouragement and support to the 
Authority, especially in resolving any concerns on facilitation of the Authority’s functional needs 
by the Government. The Hon’ble Minister of State, Ms Shobha Shobha Karandlaje supported the 
Authority on each occasion with unrestricted encouraged us on every occasion and extended their 
full support to the Authority.  
 
I owe a huge element of thanks to Shri Sanjay Agarwal, Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare for enabling the Chairperson have the 
administrative and fibnancial powers restored which was pending for the last four years. In 
addition, the Department showed positive orientation towards the Authority’s needs and 
requirements. This had put on an artificial unwarranted speed breaker imposed in 2017 owing to 
some misinterpretation of the provisions in the Act which was resolved on April 4, 2022 after 
nearly five years finally, after exercising due diligence and involved deliberations with 
interventions by the highest officials in the Department, including the then OSD Shri Manoj 
Ahuja, who later took over the reigns from Shri Agarwal as Secretary, Agriculture during the 
current year. Had this restoration come about immediately after the matter was brought to the 
notice of the Ministry, may be, the performance and activities in full implementation of the 
provisions of the Act could have been at a much higher level than being reported here. The 
national judiciary system, law enforcing authorities, customs, NBA, SBA, State departments of 
Agriculture, Horticulture, Forestry etc., would have been brought on board to have a participatory 
role or executive role when called up to in implementing both plant breeders’ rights and farmers’ 
rights. Such national level programmes could not be taken up due to issues related redelegated 
financial powers.  Similarly, on many issues he showed his willingness to give a patient hearing to 
the matters of concerns that were to be resolved at the Department thereby, moving towards the 
right solution that would ultimately help the Authority to function as a Statutory Body. There are 
still a few issues related to amendments required in the Rules and Regulations primarily in 
addition to revising recruitment rules for upgrading the staff positions at the Registry of the 
Authority. The Secretary,  in position at the time of filing this Report, Shri Manoj Ahuja has been 
very positive and open to review the requirements at the Authority and has accorded sufficient 
time in dealing with the  issues requiring reforms and governmental support a statutory body like 
Annual Report 2021 -22 iv 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 this deserves to receive from the Government.  In Mr Sanjiv Kumar, Additional Secretary and 
Financial Adviser, the Authority found a positive support who provided the required grants in time 
by settling all queries and satisfying himself with the justification etc., by according a priority 
required to be lent to a Statutory body by the Government. .   
 
Shri Ashwani Kumar, Joint Secretary (Seed) and one of the exofficio Members of the 
Authority continued to play a key role, the most important contact point with the Government for 
the Authority to be facilitating all the support as envisaged in the provisions of the Act. On several 
issues Shri Kumar provided pro-active and creative support in arranging the logistics etc., for the 
execution of the Indo-German programme on Seed Sector improvement or timely release of funds 
for the building and day- to-day execution of the registration process of the plant varieties. Shri 
Kumar was very respectful and dignified in executing his responsibility in the facilitation or 
approvals proposed, thereby providing the Authority the needed support despite being a very busy.  
 
I gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the Hon’ble ex-officio members of the 
Authority including the Commissioners of Agriculture and Horticulture, Deputy Director General 
(Crop Sciences) and Joint Secretary (Seed) from the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences) of ICAR, Director, NBPGR; Joint Secretary (Law), 
Nominees of the Departments of Environment, Forests and Climate Change,  Biotechnology for 
their support, though for the reason on non-filling of the post of Registrar-General no Authority 
Meeting could be held, other officers who served on various committees/task forces with 
dedication which have helped the Authority in scaling new horizons and setting new standards. 
 
I thank the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Indian Council of 
Forest Research and Education (ICFRE) and other Research Institutions for providing continuous 
support to the Authority and facilitating conduct of the DUS Trials.  
 
The technical wing of the Seed Division with Shri M Gunasekaran, Assistant 
Commissioner along with his team on technical matters, and Shri Rakesh Singh Nayal,            
Deputy Secretary and Shri Vagulaparnam, Under-Secretary, Seed Division on administrative 
matters were always considerate and prompt in providing the functional connectivity required 
between the nodal Ministry and the Authority. I also take this opportunity to acknowledge the 
cooperation and help extended by Dr A K Singh, Director, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute (IARI), Dr D  K Yadava, Assistant Director General (Seed) and Dr Kuldeep Singh, 
Director, ICAR-National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR) for successfully 
shouldering various responsibilities entrusted by the Authority.  
 
I acknowledge with thanks the services of State Bank of India and Syndicate Bank for their 
financial services. I am grateful to CAG team for their timely auditing, guidance and direction. I 
thank the CAG for organizing timely audit of the organization and am grateful to the team for 
putting in extra in order to correctly assess the documentations recorded by the understaffed 
procurement and IFD units, though without slightest of compromise.  The Annual Account of the 
Authority has been audited and submitted to CAG within prescribed time schedule. 
 
The Registrar Dr T K Nagarathna shouldered the entire responsibility of the Registry by 
extending her whole hearted cooperation with a commitment displayed in effecting several 
procedural changes in the registration of the plant varieties. I express my appreciation and grateful 
thanks to her for reforming or also correcting the past inconsistencies or oversights while dealing 
with the applications and the processes of the technical protocols development for new plant 
species, DUS testing, monitoring of the test locations in the country so that the data generated 
Annual Report 2021 -22 v 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 were consistent and authentic to stand the various tests of scrutiny and comparisons with the other 
international authorities.   In fact shri Dipal Roy Choudhury, the only Joint Registrar in the  
Registry, she found a genuine officer who could participate in the actions with complete 
involvement, dedication and perfect management of the Gene Bank as well as managing seed 
distribution after facilitating coding of two levels prior to dispatch. . Often these actions involved 
time-bound hard work and large data handling.  Both these officials of the Registry also handled 
several additional responsibilities keeping the Authrity work as the priority over anything else 
working as a team making best use of the talented young post-graduates who provided the 
database inputs on each application made for registration of plant varietiesmaintaining the 
confidentiality as well as integrity about the files handled.I am pleased to record that the legal 
team now is arguably one of the best in the IPR regulatory authorities in the country as well as 
among the plant variety protection authorities globally, with two BAR qualified senior persons 
experienced in dealing with the legal issues. Head of the Legal section, Shri Raj Ganesh most 
efficiently managed all the petitions and applications for correctly taking each to logical 
conclusions. Whether the orders were issued by the Registrar, Registar General or Chariperson, 
none was set aside in the High Courts. This excellent support he provided along with effective 
participation of his team mate Shri Arun Kumar, Legal Advisor who joined the Authority last year 
is highly appreciated as it would not have been otherwise possible to confidently dispose of the 
petitions made. Both Raj Ganesh and Arun Kumar provided totally involved participatory support 
to several other assigned responsibilities given owing to shortage of staff, ungrudgingly and 
enthusiastically in the interest of the Authority’s well being. I thank Shri Raj Ganesh and Shri 
Arun Kumar along with their team for standing by my side solidly while I executed business. They 
made me feel that I was a full time judge qualified as a law professional by the approach and in-
prinicple execution of the judicial proceedings despite the high level of technical bases of plant 
breeding science involved in many cases. .    
 
Shri Vipin Tyagi, Financial Advisor played a superb role auditor and accounts manager of 
the Authority with “no frills” attitude and simple direct set of advice done without compromise, 
but in a fully comprehendible and amicable assertions. If financial advisors followed such 
approach that enables an easily interpretable rule position on any matter, I am sure most competent 
authorities will not only turn out to be smart decision makers but also efficient ones making best 
use of public funds. I consider it as one of the best set of financial management team I have come 
across in my career. Vipin has been able to fully streamline and comply with the CAG advice so 
that the procedure of auditing is facilitated with clarity.  
 
   Even though staff is not adequate in any meaning of adequacy at the Authority including 
the Registry, I accord huge appreciation to the three Deputy Registrars,  Shri Uma Kant Dubey, 
Shri Ravinder Singh Sengar and Shri P S Malviya, for their unflinching readiness to take up any 
task given to complete it as required and within time, each time. While Shri Dubey came up with 
being up to date with the Plant Variety Journal, bringing it out on the first of every month, under 
Dr Nagarathna’s guidance which she gave with extraordinary care, vigil and accuracy required 
during the period of report. This incidentally a standard that has been newly set compared to the 
past where there was invariably a backlog. I appreciate all the involved staff of the Registry in 
generating and providing the information to Shri Dubey for timely compilation and publication, as 
this is the only source for any opposition to be filed for pre-registration opposition as well as post-
registration benefit share claims. Shri Dipal Choudhury, Ravindra Sengar, Vipin Tyagi and U K 
Dubey in facilitating the purchases and procurements following GEM regulations is deeply 
appreciated, as much as the coordination by Shri U K Dubey in managing the networking with 
NIC for portal management along with the technical insights on online application development by 
Shri Dipal Chowdury.   
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 vi 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 I must make it a point to mention how happy I am to acknowledge the exceptionally good 
work being done with no precedence to emote or repeat at the Authority’s Shivamogga centre 
hosted by the University of Agriculture and Horticultural Sciences. Dr T. H. Gowda as consultant 
Deputy Registrar and Drs Ajay Kumar Singh and D S Pilania lived far beyond expectations in 
dealing with all practical problems while handling crops some of which they may have been 
growing for the first time in their careers.  
 
The procedures and protocols followed during the registration process of every kind of 
plant variety are entirely based on the raw data generated by the nearly 200 DUS centres being put 
into operation with due notification. The self-less service put in by the dedicated Principal 
Investigators who are invariably very senior plant breeding scientists in all the public research 
organizations and their teams who are monitored rigorously duing the crop season is most 
gratefully acknowledged as they happen to be the extended arms of the Authority in carrying out 
the judicial procedure with respect to every application being filed. 
 
I take this opportunity to thank Shri Raj Ganesh and his team with Shri Arun Kumar who 
coordinated the compilation responsibility of this report from all the contributors from Registry, 
Gene Bank, Regional Stations, Legal Cell, Finance and Administration in time to be put before the 
Authority for approval. I am also happy to note that the Computer Assistants  Ms Shipra Mathur, 
Shri Aravind Rai and Shri Sanjay Gupta and Shri Shyam Narayan have now come of age and 
updated themselves sufficiently to rally behind the sincere and thoughtful leadership of the new 
Registrar General Dr Dinesh Agarwal who assumed his office in May 2022, which gives me lots 
of hope on digitized documentation and registry procedure for eliminating any arbitrariness in the 
process, likely to happen with the Registry. It goes without saying that the nearly 90 contractal 
staff at all the branches and head quarters as well as a few in the Ministry who provided the 
required logistic support to complete the work to logical conclusions, are also the human resource 
of high value at the Authority whose performance is basic for functioning of the Authority, which 
they put in as instructed to our full satisfaction.  
 
I am personally grateful to the unquestioned response and dutiful obedience that I received 
from one and all during the last four years at this only one of a kind Authroity in the world dealing 
with plant variety protection and farmers rights protection. The Authority needs continued support 
from the Government to execute its responsibilities through the Registry and Authority office so 
that in the years to come leading to Indian hundred years after independence by being a developed 
country, this Authority is regarded as the global leader in perfecting the techno-legal regulation of 
IPR on plant varieties by balancing both plant breeders’ and farmers’ rights on the plant varieties.  
 
 
(K V Prabhu ) 
Chairperson 
Protection of Plant Varieties & Farmers’ Rights Authority, New Delhi 
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 vii 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed is the furrow, sow the seed within it. 
                                                                                                                                             Rig Veda 
Hymn CI. Viśvedevas 
 
‘To forget how to dig the earth and tend the soil is to forget ourselves’ is the apt quote of our 
Father of Nation which highlights the importance of Agriculture in our social, economic and cultural 
system.  Seed is the pivot point of agriculture and is also the sustenance of life on earth. 
Implementation of Intellectual Property Rights over seeds assumes great significance in light of 
farmers being true breeders and conservers of traditional varieties which actually forms the gene pool 
for plant varietal development. 
“A Weed is a Plant whose virtues have never been discovered” this Emerson’s quote speaks 
about the scope of plant breeding even in this modern era. Plant Breeding requires knowledge and 
passion equally as quoted by Luther Burbanks ‘The secret of improved plant breeding apart from 
scientific knowledge is love’.  Granting Intellectual Property Rights to plant breeders came from the 
thought of Edison on seeing plant varieties developed by Luther Burbanks.  Indian Law of Plant 
Varieties Protection which is unique in nature has elevated it to even higher level and thereby granting 
Intellectual Property Rights not only to plant breeders but also to breeders and conservers of traditional 
varieties being farmers who are our true Burbanks on field.  Having had a rear mirror view of the last 
financial year from this Annual Report and now steering the Registry amidst challenges, I thank my 
predecessors who have done much but again much is to be done also.  Hence, I have no hesitation to 
say that with your co-operation and assistance I will be placing this IPR Registry though the youngest 
as a pioneer on higher pedestal amongst other IPR Registries. 
I cannot resist my praise and acknowledgements for Dr. K.V. Prabhu, our beloved Chairperson 
who has led from the front and achieved several milestones in the previous financial year. I thank our 
members of the Authority who were instrumental in deciding several important decisions of the 
Authority. I also thank ICAR Institutes and SAUs in discharging the statutory duties as DUS test 
centres of Authority.  I thank all Principal Investigators of DUS test centres without their timely output 
the publication of this report would not have been possible.  I also thank UPRNN who are involved in 
the construction of Plant Authority Bhawan. I also acknowledge the role played by our Nodal Ministry 
and Seed Division.  I also thank Dr. T.K. Nagarathna, Registrar and Dr. Ravi Prakash, Registrar (on 
deputation) for key role played by them during the reporting period.  I also acknowledge the efforts 
and inputs of officers of the Authority namely, Shri. Vipin Tyagi, Financial Advisor, Shri. Dipal Roy 
Choudhury, Joint Registrar, Sh. U.K. Dubey, Deputy Registrar and Sh. R.S. Sengar, Deputy Registrar.  
I also acknowledge the efforts of Dr. A.K. Singh, Plant Variety Examiner and Dr. D.S. Pilania, 
Technical Assistant, PPVFRA.  I also thank Sh. Raj Ganesh, Legal Advisor and his team Shri. Arun 
Kumar, Legal Advisor and Legal Cell for coordinating in compiling and publishing this report.  I thank 
one and all involved in the publication of this report. 
 
 
(D.K. Agarwal) 
Registrar-General  
  Acknowledgements  

Annual Report 2021 -22 viii 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Executive Summary  
 
        The “Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act” (53 of 2001) is a unique Act 
which fulfills the spirit of International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food & Agriculture. 
It also strikes a balance between the rights to breeders and the farmers as per the national 
requirement. The Authority, since its  establishment in the year 2005, has been consistently 
improvising the system of registering the plant varieties, connecting the stakeholders, encourage 
innovation in seed sector, acknowledge the contribution by the farmers/communities towards 
conservation of plant genetic resources and making them available to plant breeders, established a 
National Gene Fund, build and maintain gene banks etc.  
 Till the time of going for printing, the Government of India has notified 172 crop species 
on the recommendations of PPVFR Authority for plant variety registration. During the reporting 
period, the Authority notified Jackfruit, Greater Yam, Yam Bean, Seabuckthrorn, Ajwain, Anise, 
Celery, Cumin, Dill, Fennel, Nigella. In the year 2021-22, the Authority received a total of 311 
applications belonging to different categories of Public (94), Private (189), Farmers’ (27), New 
(142), Extant Notified (81), Extant VCK (60) and EDV (Nil) varieties. Out of 311 applications, 
189 applications were filed by private sector, 94 applications were filed by public sector and 27 by 
farmers. Under extant notified category, 81 applications were received, 60 under extant VCK, 142 
under New and 27 under farmer’s variety category were also filed for registration. During 2021-
22, 311 applications were received in respect of 38 crop species. Highest number of applications is 
received in Rice (62) followed by Maize (48), Wheat (14), Pearl millet (28), Chilli (50), Tetraploid 
Cotton (8), Sorghum (4), Tomato (4), etc.   
 In the annual year of 2021-22, a total of 475 certificates of registration were issued. In the 
Farmers’ varieties (128), New Varieties (137) and Varieties of Common Knowledge (54) and 
Extant Notified Varieties (156) plant varieties were registered. Similarly, highest number of 
certificates were issued for cereals (312) followed by vegetables (38), fibre crops (55), Oilseeds 
(14), legumes (29), Flowers (07), Trees (07), Fruits (06), Cucurbits (04), Spices (02) and 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (01). 
 The Legal Cell of the Authority pursued the cases filed in different Courts.  During the 
reporting period, 33 cases were pending against the Authority.  The Notifications published in the 
Gazette of India were Gazette Notification No. S.O. 3418 (E)  dated August 23, 2021 relating to 
notification of four crop species, G.S.R . 803 (E)  dated November, 16, 2021 regarding amendment 
in Rule 19 and Gazette Notification S.O. 1197 (E)  dated March  16, 2022  regarding Notification of 
seven crop species. 
During the reporting period, the Authority received 26 applications either directly from the 
applicant or transferred from other departments seeking information under RTI Act, 2005.  The 
information sought was made available within the stipulated period.  There are no appeals pending 
before the first Appellate Authority.  
   
The following national and international seminars/webinars were either organized or in which 
PPVFRA participated actively are as follows:  
Annual Report 2021 -22 ix 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  International Webinar on Exchange on PVP Post Control Measures (4th April, 2021) 
 India’s Negotiation with EU on FTA (12th August, 2021) 
 Project Steering Committeee Meeting between India and Germany under Indo-German 
bilateral co-operation on Seed Sector Development. (2nd September, 2021) 
 Indo-German Co -operation on Seed Sector Development – Exchange on Biochemical and 
Molecular Techniques Guidelines (16 – 17th December, 2021) 
 Webinar on Legal Aspects involved in PPVFR Act organised by PPVFR Authority in 
collobaration with DU (14th January, 2022) 
 Indo-German Co-operation on Seed Sector Development meeting (17 February, 2022) 
The Authority received 5999.90 lakhs as grants in aid from DAC&FW, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare during the year and utilized Rs.6152.29 lakhs after adjustment of 
unspent balance of 170.39 lakhs of previous year leaving a balance of Rs. 18.00 lakhs. The Annual 
Account of the Authority has been audited and submitted to CAG within prescribed time schedule. 
 
The annual accounts of the Authority for the year 2021-22 was finalized and audited within 
the prescribed time schedule and placed before both the houses of the Parliament within statutory 
time limit. The Annual Report of Authority is being forwarded in time to the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare for placing before both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 1 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 1: Introduction  
 
Plant varieties are vital for the survival of human beings and livestock as they serve as 
source of food, fibre, fodder, forest and raw materials for domestic households and industries in 
any society. Even before the science of genetics was discovered in late 19th Century, the 
scientific foundation of plant breeding science and techniques, since human beings began 
cultivating plants for a purpose of hnarvesting its product for survival, the farmers have practiced 
plant breeding improving the crop generation after generation by evaluating the performance and 
expression of the plant population they are growing. Thefarming community and forest dwellers, 
nurtured existing diversity as is how is to select for better plant type and yield fromwithin the 
available adapted naturalized plant varieties such as land races to produce plants of use since 
millennia. As the science of genetics and plant breeding evolved, formally trained plant breeders 
collected genetic diversity through exploration in biodiversity rich zones, use different tool to 
increase values for cultivation. It is these plant breeders whose ingenious skill to detect 
variability, work out the genetics behind such variability and accordingly strategise the breeding 
methods enable development of new plant varieties, different and better than the previously 
existing ones. Therefoere, the  Plant Breeders’ Right is one of the most crucial intellectual 
property rights in any society as food is basic requirement for both developed and developing 
societies.  These rights granted to the plant breeders are therefore a means to recognise their 
contributions that results in the creation of an ecosystem that sustains innovation continuum. 
Such a system can establish a mechanism to exert responsible stewardship over germplasm, 
support long term research and development that would be crucial to enhance agricultural 
productivity in the form to incentivisation of  plant breeding  in public and private sectors while 
promoting the industry to competitively provide high quality seedsas well as planting materials 
to farmers. 
 Although ancient Indian history reveals records of naming of a plant variety by either the 
individual or commune or village native to the variety, in legal terms, the first formal 
enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) in plants used in agriculture came abouit in 
the form of the  “ Plant Patent Act , 1930” in USA  which was followed in Europe by the  
formation of the Union Internationale pour la Protection des Obtentions Végétales  (UPOV) or 
the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants in 1961 at Europe which 
was subsequently revised in 1972, 1978 and 1991. Presently, there are 78 member states as part 
of the UPOV convention including regional associations like EU, OAPI. India has not acceded to 
the UPOV Convention but is listed in the category of observer in the UPOV.  
 Plant variety protection through Plant Breeder’s Rights was brought into major focus by 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a multilateral instrument governing 
international trade. GATT negotiations in Uruguay Round led to the establishment of World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) in 1995. Article 27.3(b) of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) under WTO, provides that members shall provide for the 
Annual Report 2021 -22 2 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 protection of plant varieties, either by patents or by an effective sui generis  system or by any 
combination thereof.  
 The Government of India enacted the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights 
(PPVFR) Act in 2001 (53 of 2001) to provide for the establishment of an effective sui generis 
system for protection of plant varieties, the rights of farmers and plant breeders and to encourage 
the development of new plant varieties of economic importance.  
PPVFR Rules were notified on 12 September, 2003 and amended from time to time, 
thereafter. Subsequently, for the purposes of the Act, the Government of India having exercised 
the powers conferred under the section 3 (1) of this Act, established the Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority on 11 November, 2005, vide Gazette notification S.O. 
1588(E). 
 
1.1 Objectives of the PPVFR Act, 2001 
Following are the objectives of the Act:  
 To establish an effective system for protection of plant varieties, the rights of farmers and 
plant breeders and to encourage the development of new varieties of plants. 
 To recognize and protect the rights of the farmers in respect of their contribution made at any 
time in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic resources for the 
development of new plant varieties 
 To protect plant breeders’ rights to stimulate investment for research and development both 
in the public and private sector for development of new plant varieties. 
 To facilitate the growth of seed industry in the country that will ensure the availability of 
high-quality seeds and planting material to the farmers. 
 
1.2 Salient features of the Act 
 The PPVFR Act is based on the option under TRIPS Agreement for a member country to 
protect the rights of plant breeders sui generis system by enactment by legislation if they would 
not opt for UPOV (International Union for Protection of New Varieties of Plants, Geneva) 
Convention, and is also unique in the sense that it concurrently recognizes the rights of plant 
breeders, farmers (including their right as plant breeders), farming communities and researchers 
who breed new varieties as well as those already bred and existing prior to protection (extant). It 
confers exclusive rights upon the breeder or his successor, his agent or licensee, to produce, sell, 
market, distribute, import or export of the registered variety. As far as farmers’ rights are 
concerned, the Act recognizes a farmer as cultivator, conserver and breeder and provides that the 
farmers’ variety can also be registered. Further, the Act provides for compulsory license of a 
registered variety, if the seeds/propagating material is not available to the public at a reasonable 
price or quantity. Any person or group of persons or any organization can also claim for benefit 
Annual Report 2021 -22 3 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 sharing, if the plant genetic material belonging to them is used in the development of a registered 
variety. The researchers are conferred the right to use any registered variety for conducting 
experiment or research and the use of a variety by any person as an initial source of variety for 
the purpose of creating the other varieties. India is a pioneer country where a national legislation 
has been enacted to establish and secure Farmers’ Rights. The Act also recognizes the past, 
present and future contributions of the farming communities and provides an opportunity for the 
award to farming communities/farmers for their contributions in agro-biodiversity conservation. 
 
1.3 PPVFR AUTHORITY 
 The PPVFR Authority is a Statutory Body established by the Parliament of India through 
the PPVFR Act of 2001. The Authority is a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with the power to acquire, hold and dispose of movable and immovable properties 
and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. The head office of the Authority is at 
New Delhi and it is functioning from a leased space in the premise of the National Agricultural 
Science Centre Complex, Dev Prakash Shastri Marg, Pusa Campus, New Delhi. The Authority 
consists of a Chairperson and fifteen members as on 31st March, 2022 (Annexure-I) along with a 
Registry appointed by the Authority. 
 
1.4 PLANT VARIETIES REGISTRATION  
 The PPVFR Authority has finalized the Distinctiveness, Uniformity and Stability (DUS) 
test guidelines for registration of 172 crop species (Annexure-VII). The Authority has issued 475 
(Annexure-VIII) certificates of registration for plant varieties (under new, extant and farmers’ 
variety category) during the reporting year 2021-22. To facilitate more applications seeking plant 
varieties protection from different stakeholders, the Authority regularly organizes/supports 
awareness and capacity building programmes. 
 The PPVFR Authority has also established network of DUS test centres across the 
country under the Central Sector Scheme for the implementation of PPVFR Act, 2001, to verify 
the claims of candidate varieties by applicants, maintenance breeding, multiplication of 
reference/example varieties/ the varieties notified under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966, and 
generation of database for varietal characteristics as per crop specific DUS (Distinctiveness, 
Uniformity and Stability) guidelines. In addition, DUS tests for the candidate varieties are being 
conducted at crop specific centres. The data recorded as per the DUS test guidelines is submitted 
by these centres to Authority for further analysis. The Authority, in consultation with the ICAR 
institutes and SAUs has identified potential crop species of economic importance and supports 
projects for the development of the DUS guidelines. The Authority has established its National 
Gene Bank, field gene banks across the country. It regularly publishes Plant Variety Journal of 
India and maintains the National Register of Plant Varieties at Headquarters and also its branch 
offices. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 4 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 1.5 CATEGORIES OF PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES  
 The process of granting protection to a plant variety through plant breeders’ rights  a s 
enshrined in the Act is based on a broad principle of internationally recognized system of DUS 
and novelty for a new variety. Any person can apply for registration in any of the following: 
 New variety  of such genera and species as specified under section 29(2) of the Act.  
 Extant variety (To a limited period after the species is notified (in the case of new and VCK 
varieties) as announced time to time by the Authority) 
- Notified under section 5 of Seeds Act, 1966,  
- Variety of common knowledge (VCK),  
- Farmers’ variety 
- Traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their fields,  
- Wild relative or landrace of a variety about which the farmers possess common 
knowledge.  
 Essentially derived variety (EDV) 
A variety predominantly derived from an initial variety, or from a variety that itself is 
predominantly derived from such initial variety, while retaining the expression of the 
essential characteristics that result from the genotype or combination of genotypes of such 
initial variety 
 
1.6 FARMERS’ RIGHTS 
The Act, also provides following rights to the farmers that is unique only to India among all 
signatories to TRIPS and WTO and the sole reason for India not acceding to UPOV Act 1991: 
 Right to register their varieties : A farmer who has bred or developed a new variety is entitled 
for registration and other protection as a plant breeder under this Act. 
 Right on seed : A farmer is entitled to save, use, sow, resow, exchange, share or sell his farm 
produce including seed of a variety protected under this Act; provided that the farmer is not 
entitled to sell branded seed of a variety protected under this Act. 
 Right for reward and recognition : A farmer or community of farmers engaged in the 
conservation and improvement of plant genetic resources (landraces and wild relatives of 
economic plants) are entitled for the Plant Genome Saviour Award, Reward and Recognition, 
provided their plant material has been used in development of varieties registrable under this 
Act. 
 Protection of innocent infringement : If a farmer being, infringed according to section 65 of 
PPVFR Act, 2001, can prove before court that he or she was not aware of the existence of 
such rights at the time of infringement; he or she will not be charged. 
 Fee Exemption : A farmer or group of farmers are not liable to pay any fee payable for 
inspection of any document or for obtaining a copy of any decision or order or document 
Annual Report 2021 -22 5 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 under this Act. Farmers have the privilege of being completely exempted from payment of 
any kind of fees or other payments that are normally payable for variety registration; testing 
of varieties and other services rendered by the PPVFRA; as well as for legal proceedings 
related to infringement or other cases in courts, tribunal etc. 
 Reasonable Seed Price : Farmers have the right to access seed of registered varieties at a 
reasonable and remunerative price. When this condition is not met, the breeder's exclusive 
right over the variety can be revoked under the provision concerning compulsory licensing, 
and the breeder is obligated to license the seed production, distribution and sales of the 
variety to any competent person. Most of the laws for plant varieties protection have 
provisions on compulsory licensing of protected varieties to ensure adequate seed supply to 
farmers. 
 Authorization of farmers’ variety : In the development of an essentially derived variety from a 
farmer’s variety and its commercialization. The authorization should be given with the 
consent of the farmer or group of farmers who have contributed in the conservation or 
development of such a variety. Such a process can allow farmers to negotiate the terms of 
authorization with the breeders, which may include royalties, benefit-sharing etc. 
 Right for compensation : When any propagating material of a variety registered under this Act 
has been sold to a farmer, the breeder of such variety should disclose the expected 
performance under given conditions. If the propagating material fails to provide such 
performance under such given conditions, the farmer can claim compensation before the 
Authority. The Authority would then notify the breeder of the variety the issue and after 
providing him an opportunity to file an opposition, may direct the breeder to pay 
compensation to the farmer as it deems fit. 
 The Registry of the Authority facilitates the IPR registration of farmers’ varieties by 
equating the farmers to plant breeders as empowered by the Act, conducts country-wide training-
cum-awareness programmes, and identifies farmers and farmer communities for their 
contribution towards conserving germplasm and developing new varieties. 
 
1.7 PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS 
Registration gives exclusive rights to produce, sell, market, export or imports the variety 
along with its denomination. This right is subject to farmers’ rights that farmers can use seeds of 
registered varieties in an unbranded manner.  
 Breeders’ Right is one of the pivotal provisions of this Act with far reaching implications 
in the context of Indian agriculture and global scenario. The breeder also enjoys provisional 
protection of his/her variety against any abusive act committed by any third party during the 
period between filing of application for registration and the final decision taken by the Authority. 
Similarly, researcher’s rights are also granted. However, for repeated use of a registered variety 
Annual Report 2021 -22 6 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 as an initial source of variety for the purpose of developing a new variety, the authorization of 
the breeder of the registered variety is necessary. 
 
1.8 REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES  
 An application for registration of a plant variety and its denomination can be made under 
the following categories: 
 New Variety: On the date of filing of application for registration if the variety has been 
commercialized for period of less than one year then it is a new variety 
 Extant Variety: Consist of the following categories namely:  
- Extant variety notified under section 5 of Seeds Act, 1966: Varieties notified under 
Section 5 of Seeds Act, 1966 are eligible for registration under this category  
- Farmers’ variety: Traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their fields and 
includes wild relative or land race or a variety about which the farmers possess common 
knowledge  
- Variety of Common Knowledge (VCK): which are not notified under Section 5 of 
Seeds Act, 1966 and are in commercial chain for more than a year  
 Essentially Derived Variety: A variety pre-dominantly derived from an initial variety and 
should fall either under new or extant category.  
 
The category of extant variety for VCK and Notified extant varieties is no more available in 
the following crop species since January 2021 as per the Public Notice No. 16 of 2021 issued 
under Section 15(2) of the PPVFR Act, 2001. 
 
1.9 EXTENT AND NATURE OF FIELD-TESTING (DUS TESTING) OF VARIETIES 
 The application is processed depending on the category of the variety claimed for 
registration, accordingl to which the applicant is required to deposit DUS test, registration and 
any other fees, as may be required. After receipt of necessary fees and seeds and to a satisfactory 
examination of the application at the Plant Varieties Registry, the Registrar shall send the variety 
to crop specific centres for conducting DUS test. The period of DUS testing is as follows: 
 New Varieties:  Two similar crop seasons at two locations  
 Farmers’ Variety and VCK: One crop season at two locations  
 Extant variety notified under section 5 of Seeds Act, 1966: No DUS testing is conducted 
but variety is processed by an EVRC Committee which recommends for registration 
 EDV: DUS testing is not mandatory but field test is conducted to ascertain DUS criteria  
 After the receipt of DUS test result, the application is processed and distinctiveness is 
ascertained through DUS test and comparison across the database. Subsequently, the passport 
data of the variety is published in the Plant Varieties Journal of India . 
Annual Report 2021 -22 7 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  The application is advertised in Plant Variety Journal of India  inviting opposition within 
a period of three months from the date of publications. If no opposition is filed or if opposition 
filed is rejected, the variety proceeds for registration. The period of protection is as follows : 
 
1.9.1 Protection Period in Different Types of Crops 
 
 A total of 172 crop species are presently eligible for protection (Annexure VII). The total 
period of protection for field crops is of 15 years with 6 years of protection at the time of 
registration renewable to next 9 years, whereas that of trees and vines is for 18 years with 9 years 
of protection at the time of registration renewable to next 9 years. The extant varieties notified 
are given a protection for 15 or 18 years for field crops or trees and vines respectively, from date 
of notification under Seeds Act, 1966. 
 
1.10 AWARD/REWARDS TO FARMERS’/FARMING COMMUNITIES 
 Section 45(2) of the Act reads with Rules 70 (2) (a) of PPVFR Rules, 2003 provides for 
support and reward, to farmers, communities of farmers, particularly the tribal and rural 
communities engaged in conservation, improvement and preservation of genetic resources of 
economic plants and their wild relatives, particularly in areas identified as agro-biodiversity 
hotspots from National Gene Fund. To operationalize these provisions, Plant Genome Savior 
Community Award  was instituted in 2009–10. A maximum of five such awards can be conferred 
annually. Along with this, ten farmers are conferred the Plant Genome Saviour Farmer Reward 
and twenty farmers are conferred Plant Genome Saviour Farmer Recognition certificates. The 
details of the awards conferred are mentioned in Table 1. The selection of awardees is made by a 
committee of experts/ scientists headed by an eminent scientist/ subject matter specialist. 
 
Table 1.1:  Details of the Plant Genome Savior awards, rewards and recognition 
Award Details Application  
Plant Genome 
Saviour 
Community 
Awards Five farming communities are 
awarded each year.  
Each award includes a citation, 
a memento and Rs. 10 lakhs.  Advertisement for these awards is 
published in the National dailies and on 
the Authority website: 
(http://www.plantauthority.gov.in/form
s.htm) 
The applications should be forwarded 
by Chairperson/Secretary of the 
concerned Panchayat Biodiversity 
Management Committee or C oncerned Plant Genome 
Saviour Farmers’ 
Rewards Ten farmers are rewarded every 
year. 
Each reward includes a citation, 
a memento and cash of Rs. 1.5 
Annual Report 2021 -22 8 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 lakh. District Agricultural Officer or 
Director of Research of Concerned 
State Agriculture University or 
Concerned District Tribal Development 
Officer 
 Plant Genome 
Saviour Farmers’ 
Recognitions  Twenty farmers are rewarded 
every year.  
Each reward includes a citation, 
a memento and cash of Rs. 1 
lakh. 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 9 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 2: Plant Varieties Registry 
2.1 PUBLICATION OF DUS TEST GUIDELINES FOR CROP SPECIES 
During 2021-22, DUS guidelines have been developed for seven crop species and published in 
Plant Variety Journal of India  as mentioned in Table 2.1 totalling to 172  crop species for which 
Authority has developed DUS guidelines and notified in Gazette of India. Registrations are now 
open for plant variety protection under PPVFR Act, 2001  for the varieties under these different 
crop species. The proposal advising the Government of India for their notification in the Gazette 
of India is under consideration to faciliatate registration of varieties of these crop species in 
future.   
Table 2.1: DUS test guidelines developed for different crop species during 2021-22. 
Sl. No. Crop & Species  PVJ Publication details  
1 Ajwain 
 (Trachyspermum ammi  L.) 
December 01, 2021 (Vol. 
15 No. 12)  2 Anise 
 (Pimpenella anisum  L.) 
3 Celery  
(Apium graveolens  L.) 
4 Cumin  
(Cuminum cyminum  L.) 
5 Dill  
(Anethum graveolens  L. and Anethum sowa Roxb) 
6 Fennel 
 (Foeniculum vulgare  Mill.) 
7 Nigella  
(Nigella sativa  L.) 
 
2.2 NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS RECEIVED DURING 2021-22  
During 2021-22, total of 311 applications were received for registration from both public and 
private as well as farmers’ variety sectors under different categories, despite the COVID 19 
related inconvenience or difficulties in ferrying the seed or seeding materials along with the 
application documentation durnitn the period of lock down that prevailed for the major part of 
the year. Majority of applications belonged to cereals, vegetables and fruits crops (Table 2.3).  
Table 2.2: Total number of applications received during 2021-22 (Sector-wise) crops group-
wise) 
Category  Public Sector  Private Sector Farmers 
New 23 119 - 
Annual Report 2021 -22 10 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Extant Notified  69 12 - 
Extant VCK  2 58 - 
Extant Farmers  - - 27 
EDV - - - 
 
Table 2.3: Total number of applications received during 2021-22 (crop group-wise) 
Crop Group  Total Crop Group  Total 
Cereals  164 Oilseeds  12 
Cucurbits 8 Trees 4 
Fibre Crops  9 Sugar Crops  2 
Flowers 3 Vegetables  82 
Fruits 18   
Legumes  9   
  Grand Total  311 
Highest number of applications is received for Rice (62), Chilli (50), Maize (48), Pearl millet 
(28), Wheat (14), Tetraploid cotton (8), Sorghum (4), etc. (Table 2.4) 
Table 2.4: Total number of applications received (crop-wise) 
S.No. Common Name  Total S.No. Common Name  Total 
1 Rice 62 20 Sugarcane  2 
2 Maize 48 21 Cowpea  1 
3 Wheat 14 22 Pear 2 
4 Pearl Millet  28 23 Grapes  2 
5 Chilli  50 24 Dicoccum wheat  4 
6 Tetraploid Cotton  8 25 Muskmelon  3 
7 Sorghum 4 26 Bitter Gourd  3 
8 Tomato  4 27 Cucumber  2 
9 Okra/Lady's Finger  7 28 Diploid Cotton  1 
10 Soyabean  4 29 Marigold 3 
11 Finger Millet  1 30 Pigeon pea  3 
12 Black gram  4 31 Watermelon  3 
13 Cauliflower  8 32 Green gram  2 
14 Brinjal 5 33 Jackfruit  5 
15 Durum Wheat  1 34 Mango  1 
16 Indian mustard (Sarson)  8 35 Apple 2 
17 Onion 1 36 Barley 2 
18 Bottle Gourd  3 37 Cashew 2 
19 Datepalm  3 38 Guava 1 
    Grand Total  311 
Annual Report 2021 -22 11 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Out of 311 applications, 189 applications were filed by private sector, 94 applications were filed 
by public sector and 28 by farmers. Under extant notified category, 81 applications were 
received, 60 under extant VCK, 143 under New, and 28 under farmer’s variety category were 
also filed for registration. During 2021-22, 311 applications were received in respect of 39 crop 
species.    
 
2.3. REPORTS OF BRANCH OFFICES OF THE REGISTRY 
 
2.3.1. Branch Office, Shivamogga 
During the reporting year 2021-22 the Shivamogga Branch office was headed by Dr. T.H. 
Gowda, Deputy Registrar up till 2nd March 2022. Thereafter, the branch office is headed as In-
charge by Dr. Ajay Kumar Singh, PVE. Along with the mandated activities of the branch office 
which is also designated as DUS test centre involved in characterization, hybridisation and 
rejuvenation of different Agri-horticultural crops.  
 
A. Plant variety Registration  
 
The details of applications for registrations of crop varieties received under various 
categories are detailed below.  Applications were scrutinised and verified through Registry 
Assistants, PVE and were forwarded to PPVFRA. 
 
Table 2.5: Details of applications filled from this branch office  
 
Crop No of applications  
New variety  08 
Extant notified variety  02 
Extant variety  01 
Farmers’ variety  05 
Total 16 
 
B. Visits, Participation and Extension activities   
 Session with KSNUAHS Final Year students of B.Sc (Agri), regarding the activities of 
PPVFRA and also about the registration of varieties under PPVFRA on 01.04.2021. 
 Attended webinar on “Protection of Plant varieties in India” organized by Intellectual 
Property Facilitation Cell (IPFC), AIP – ICRISAT on 08.04.2021 at 11.00 AM to 12.00 
PM. 
 Attended webinar on International webinar on Exchange on PVP Post Control Measures 
on 8th April, 2021 at 3.30 PM.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 12 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Attended as Expert in Zonal Research and Extension Program (ZREP) online workshop 
organized by UAHS, Shivamogga on 17, 18 and 21 May 2021. 
 Circulated the information regarding the Guidelines to use the Logo of PPVFR Authority 
to all the universities which comes under the jurisdiction of Branch office, Shivamogga 
on 29.07.2021.  
 Delivered  a lecture on the importance of registration of varieties under PPVFRA and also 
activities of the Branch Office to B.Sc (Agri) students of KSNUAHS on 19.09.2021, 
 Delivered  a lecture on the importance of registration of varieties under PPVFRA and also 
activities of the Branch Office to B.Sc (Agri) students of UAS Darwad on 23.09.2021 
 Visited field of Mr. Anjaneya, a farmer who has applied varieties for the registration of 
paddy varieties and also a winner of PGSC Award on 09.10.2021, 
 Participated as a member in the Committee for onsite verification for PGSC Award on 
21st October 2021, for Bhoomi Sustainable Development Society, near Laxmi Nursing 
Home, RC Road, Hassan. 
 Participated in PGSC Award function organized at New Delhi from 09.11.2021 to 
14.11.2021. 
 Participated in Krishi Mela - 2021 at Keladi Shivappa Nayaka University of Agricultural 
and Horticultural Sciences on 12 & 13 November 2021. 
 Attended webinar on 16th & 17th December 2021 on “Exchange on Biochemical and 
Molecular Technique (BMT) guidelines and implementation of BMT in DUS”. 
 Participated as a member for DUS monitoring of Okra on 20.12.2021 at IIHR, Bengaluru. 
 Participated as a member in DUS monitoring of Brinjal and tomato at IIHR, Bangalore. 
 In-charge Branch office, Shivamogga has been Nominated as one of member of four 
member team to participate in a five day study visit, consultation meeting and training in 
Germany on DUS Testing on Mustard and Rapeseed under Bilateral agreement of Indo-
German Cooperation on Seed Sector Development . The visit has been planned to have 
a view of the most recent technologies used in Germany on DUS testing to facilitate 
understanding and exchanging of experience and information about DUS testing 
procedures.  
 In-charge Branch Office and its staffs participated in the Annual Technical Meeting of 
Plant Science group at Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, CoA, KSNUAHS, 
Shivamogga held on 10th  and 11th March 2022.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 13 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
Participated in Krishi mela - 2021 at 
KSNUAHS, Shivamogga  
 Session with B.Sc (Agri) students of UAS Darwad.  
  
Participated in Annual Technical 
Meeting of Plant Science group at 
Department of GPB, CoA, KSNUAHS, 
Shivamogga  
 Session with B.Sc (Agri) students of KSNUAHS  
 
 
 
Visited Farmer’s seed bank 
aDavanagere district  Onsite verification for PGSC Award at Hassan 
district 

Annual Report 2021 -22 14 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
PGSC Award function at New Delhi  DUS Monitoring of Okra at IIHR, Bengaluru  
 
C. Publications:  
 
1. Published article entitled “Farmers' Rights for Seed Self-Reliance, Independence and 
Role of PPVFRA” (by T H Gowda, Janardhana B, Rashmi K P and Anup S) in Negila 
Miditha (Kannada language) technical tri monthly journal published by KSNUAHS, 
Shivamogga 
2. Published technical folder entitled “Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights” in 
local language Kannada (by T H Gowda, Janardhana B, Rashmi K P and Anup S ) 
3. Advertised about the Plant Genome Saviour Award in local news paper  to encourage the 
farmers to apply for the award. 
 
D. Experts visit:  
 
 Dr. Pitchaimuthu, Principal Scientist, Division of Vegetable crops, ICAR- IIHR, 
Bengaluru, visited the Branch Office on 24.12.2021. 
 Dr. Ashok Dalwai, IAS, Chief Executive Officer, National Rainfed Area Authority,  
Dept. of Agriculture and Farmers welfare, New Delhi visited DUS Testing field and 
Branch Office, Shivamogga on 12.03.2022 to look after the activities going on in the 
Branch Office. 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 Visit of Registrar & I/c of Branch Office, Shivamogga 24.03.2022 & 25.03.2022 to 
review the progress activities in the Branch Office. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 15 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
        
Felicitation to Vice-Chancellor for his completion of term of service as a Vice-Chancellor, 
KSNUAHS, Shivamogga on 25.03.2022. Dr. T K Nagarathna, Registrar & I/c Branch Office, 
Shivamogga expressed thanks for his gratefulness and supportive nature to help the 
establishment and functioning of Branch Office in all aspects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Financial Progress for the year 2021-2022 
 
Sl.No Project title  Sanctioned 
(Rs.) Expenditure 
(Rs.) Balance 
(Rs.) 
1 Stability Assessment Hybrid Seed 
Production/DUS characterization of 
Parental Lines for Cereals (except 
Maize &Rice), Pulses and Vegetable 
crops” 11,38,000.00  7,95,221.00  3,42,779.00  
2 Hybrid Seed Production/ DUS 
characterization and testing of 
Parental lines of Maize and Oil Seeds 
Crop.                       3,73,000.00  3,13,742.00  59,258.00  
3 Stability Analysis/ Hybrid Seed 
Production/ DUS characterization of 
Parental Lines for Rice and Cotton.  14,65,550.00  14,12,223.00  53,327.00  
 
F. Civil works/infrastructure development 
 
Following is the status of the development works carried out at the PPVFRA, Branch 
office, Shivamogga with the help of Vice Chancellor, Director of Research, Comptroller 
and Estate Officer of UAHS, Shivamogga and with the kind approval of the authority.  

Annual Report 2021 -22 16 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S.No. Particulars  Sanctioned 
(Rs.) Remarks  
1 Chain link fencing  41,50,000.00  Work completed  
2 Office renovation  9,75,000.00  Work completed  
3 Irrigation Pipeline  6,70,000.00  Work completed  
4 Jack well 90,000.00  Work completed  
5 CCTV Camera  45,67,000.00  Work under progress  
6 CCTV server room and Temporary field 
structures 9,70,000.00  Work under progress  
 
A. Projects under operation at the Centre 
 
Project title: “Stability Assessment, Hybrid Seed Production/DUS Characterization of 
Parental Lines for Cereals (except Maize and Rice), Pulses and Vegetable crops”   
 During 2021-2022 this centre PPVFRA, UAHS, Shivamogga has received  
Agri-Horticultural crops for DUS characterization and production of hybrid as well as to produce 
selfed-seed. 
Sowing: As per instructions given in the DUS guidelines crops were taken up for sowing and all 
the recommended package of practices (POP - UHS Bagalkot and POP-UAS Bengaluru) and 
plant protection measures were followed to have good crop stand and to harvest the sufficien t 
quantity of hybrid and selfed-seeds. 
Table 2.6: List of candidate varieties maintained at PPVFRA, DUS test centre, Shivamogga 
during 2021-2022 
S. 
No. Crops  Season Date of 
sowing Date of 
harvesting  Parental lines  Reference 
varieties Total       
entries A B R 
CEREALS and PULSES  
1. Pearl millet   Kharif 29.07.2021  23.11.2021  17 12 16 3 48 
2. Sorghum     Kharif 29.07.2021  07.12.2021  1 1 1 4 7 
3. Green 
gram  Kharif 16.08.2021  25.10.2021  - - - 1 1 
VEGETABLES  
S. 
No Crops Season Date of 
Sowing Date of 
harvesting  Female Male Reference 
varieties Total       
entries 
4. Tomato  Rabi/Summer  23.09.2021  13.01.2022  14 14 17 45 
5. Chilli Rabi/Summer  21.10.2021  10.03.2022  29 29 18 76 
6. Brinjal Rabi/Summer  08.10.2021  14.03.2022  8 8 - 16 
7. Okra Rabi/Summer  09.10.2021  31.12.2021  5 5 8 18 
8. Bitter 
gourd  Rabi/Summer  17.09.2021  06.1.2022  4 4 2 10 
9. Bottle 
gourd Rabi/Summer  17.09.2021  18.01.2022  2 2 2 6 
Annual Report 2021 -22 17 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 10. Ridge 
gourd  Rabi/Summer  17.09.2021  06.01.2022  2 2 - 4 
11. Water 
melon Summer 07.02.2022  28.04.2022  4 4 3 11 
12. Musk 
melon Summer 07.02.2022  26.04.2022  1 1 2 4 
 
DUS Characterization:  All the DUS observations were recorded from 10 randomly selected 
plants by the project staff at appropriate stage and data entry into the excel sheet is in progress 
and same will be forwarded to PI of project after completion. 
Hybridization:  The manual techniques were followed for production of hybrid seed. Female 
and Male and A X R lines were planted together and pollen collected from male plants/R line 
and dusted over the female flower/emasculated female flower and bagged and labelled to avoid 
contamination.  
Table 2.7: Details of Crops/entries for DUS characterization and F1 seed production 
(2021-2022) 
Sl. 
No Crops No. of entries 
received Purpose Status of seeds / data 
submitted to Authority  
1. Pearl millet  11(A,B &R 
Lines) 
5 (A & R line)  
1 (A& B line)  -9 entries for DUS and F 1 
Seeds Production.  
-5entries for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  
-3 entries for DUS testing.  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
-DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
2. Sorghum 1 (A,B &R 
Lines)  DUS testing and F 1 Seeds 
Production.  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
-DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
3. Green gram  1  For Rejuvenation  Seeds submitted to authority  
4. Tomato 14 (14Female 
x 14Male)  -6 entries for DUS testing 
and F1 Seeds Production.  
-2 entries for F 1 Seeds 
Production  
-6 entries for DUS testing.  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
-DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
5. Chilli 29 (29Female 
x 29Male)    29 entries for DUS and 
F1 Seeds Production.  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
-DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
6. Brinjal 8 (8Femalex 
8Male) -8entries for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  -3 entries are not germinated 
and reported to the project 
Investigator.  
- 5 entries of Hybrid and 
self-seeds submitted.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 18 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 7. Okra 5 (5Female x 
5Male) -4entries for DUS and F 1 
Seeds Production.  
-1 entry for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
-DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
8. Water 
melon 4 (4Female x 
4Male) - 2entries for DUS and F 1 
Seeds Production  
-2 entries for F1 Seeds 
Production.  Hybrid and self -seeds along 
with DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
 
9. Muskmelon  1(1Female x 
1Male) -1 entry for DUS and F 1 
Seeds Production  Hybrid and self -seeds along 
with DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
 
10. 
 
 Bitter gourd  4 (4Female x 
4Male) -3 entries for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  
-1 entry for DUS testing.  - 2 entries are not 
germinated and reported to 
Project Investigator.  
- 1 entry of Hybrid and self -
seeds submitted.  
- DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
11. Bottle 
gourd 2 (2Female x 
2Male) -1 entry for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  
-1 entries for DUS testing  -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted to Authority.  
- DUS data yet to be 
submitted.  
12. Ridge gourd  2 (2Female x 
2Male) 2 entries for F 1 Seeds 
Production.  
 -Hybrid and self -seeds 
submitted.  
 
 
 
Ridge gourd  DUS monitoring, IIHR, Bengaluru, with eminent scientists  
Dr. OP Dutta, Dr. KRM Swamy, Dr. DT Sadashiva and Dr. B. Varalaxmi  

Annual Report 2021 -22 19 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Tomato DUS monitoring, IIHR, Bengaluru, with Dr. AT Sadashiva, Dr. HC 
Prasanna, Dr. TH Singh and Dr. TH Gowda 
 
 
      
                    Bagging Pearl Millet                                   Training in Tomato 
   
                     
Crossed Fruit set in                                    Ridges and furrows opening 
           Chilli 

Annual Report 2021 -22 20 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Earthing up in Sorghum 
 
Project title:  “Hybrid seed production/ DUS characterization and testing of parental lines 
of Rice and Cotton” 
 
Site description & climatic condition: 
DUS testing centre of PPVFRA, Shivamogga lies in the southern transition zone (Zone-7) and 
located at 13o27’ to 14o39’ N latitude and 74o 37’ to 75o 52’ E longitude with an altitude of 650m 
above the MSL. During the cropping season, the total rainfall received was 621.6  mm. The 
rainfall received during August-2021 to January-2022 was highest in the month of August (265.8 
mm) followed by September (191.6 mm). There was not much variation with respect to rainfall 
distribution during crop growth period. The mean monthly maximum temperature was highest 
during November (30.70°C) while, it was least in the month of August (27.4°C). The mean 
minimum temperature was highest in the month of September (20.2°C) and lowest in the month 
of December (15.7°C). The maximum relative humidity was observed in the month of September 
(83 %) and minimum during December (64 %). The sunshine hours recorded was higher in the 
month of January (8.9 hrs.). The overall weather condition prevailed during the cropping season 
was normal.   
 
(A) Rice 
 
During the reporting year, parental entries of rice were 
taken up for DUS test as well as production of hybrids 
accommodated under project entitled “Stability 
Analysis, Hybrid Seed Production and DUS 
characterization of parental lines of Rice and 
Cotton”. Project was led by Dr Ajay Kumar Singh, 
PVE and Dr D.S. Pilania, TA respectively as Co-

Annual Report 2021 -22 21 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Principal Investigator(s) and Sh Dipal Roy Choudhury, Joint Registrar as Principal Investigator. 
Under the project, one Senior Research Fellow (Sh R. Dhinesh Kumar) & One Technical 
Assistant (Mr Venkateshan, R.) were recruited for handling the rice crop.  
 
Soil Testing 
The soil of the trial plot(s) was found to be acidic (pH ranges between 5.78 - 5.  82) in nature and 
has low organic carbon. Therefore suitable control measures like lime application for acidic soil 
and organic manure application for increasing organic carbon status of soil were made, 25kg of 
extra fertilizers in addition to regular prescribed NPK dosage and 8kg of Zn was applied since 
the field was more acidic and less nitrogen content.  
 
Main field preparation 
The well grown green manure crop (dhaincha) was incorporated and FYM were added. The field 
was irrigated, well puddled and leveled prior to transplanting. 
 
Seed Material 
During Kharif 2021 from Authority the centre received 27 entries (A, B & R) for hybridization 
and 1st year DUS characterization along with 15 reference varieties (A, B & R) and 30 entries 
(A, B & R)  for 2nd year DUS characterization as per DUS guideline. Also received 31 entries (A 
x R) for F 1 seed production. Accordingly, the trial was planned and conducted with one 
replication as per available land/area. 
 
Nursery raising & sowing  
Nursery sowing was taken up in 14th July 2021. The recommended NPK fertilizers, FYM, 
compost along with Trichoderma were applied for the nursery beds. 
• Staggered nursery sowing of R lines was done for three times with one week interval to get the 
synchronization between A and R lines in 1st year hybridization and F1 seed production program 
• Normal sowing was done for A, B and R lines for 1st year DUS & (AxB) program, 2nd year 
DUS and Reference varieties. 
 
Transplanting 
25-30 days old seedling were uprooted & transplanted on 14th August of 2021 at depth of 2-3 cm 
with recommended spacing for each program According to test plot design the crop was 
transplanted in to the three different blocks, viz., :  
 
1. Test plot design: 1st year, 2nd year DUS and Reference block 
 Number of rows                    : 1 row for each A, B & R lines of 1st year DUS & Reference 
trial 
             2 rows for each A, B & R lines of 2nd year DUS trial 
 Row length                            : 5m for each A, B & R lines 
 Row to Row distance           : 40 cm 
Annual Report 2021 -22 22 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Plant to plant distance        : 20 cm 
 Number of replication      : 01  
 
2. Maintenance block (A x B): 1st year DUS only 
 Number of rows              : 2 rows of A & B lines 
 Row length                      : 8m 
 Row to Row distance       : 30 cm 
 Plant to plant distance      : 20 cm 
 Number of replication      : 01  
 
In the maintenance block, each B line (Maintainer line which 
is fertile in nature) were transplanted at both the sides of A 
line (Male sterile line which is non fertile in nature) in BAAB manner to get the desired 
quantity of A line seeds.  
 
3. Hybridization block (A x R): 1st year DUS and F1 seed production 
 Number of rows                 : 2 rows of R line & 3 rows of A line 
 Row length                          : 8m  
 Row to Row distance       : 30 cm 
 Plant to plant distance      : 20 cm 
 Number of replications    : 01 
 
This block was planted with A and R lines with 8 meter row length (40 plants in each line). 
Plants of staggered dates were mixed before transplanting to get synchronization between A and 
R lines in RAAAR manner. 
 
Irrigation and intercultural practices  
Maintained continuous, shallow submergence of rice plants with a water depth up to 5 cm from 
the day of transplantation till mid of grain filling stage. As and when required, weeding was 
done.  
 
Fertilizer management 
Based on the soil test report recommendation, fertilizers (Urea, DAP, MOP) and other 
micronutrient fertilizers like Zn based were applied. 0.5% zinc spray was given at the time of Zn 
deficiency symptoms.  
 
Plant protection  
Plant protection measures including foliar application of Fipronil, Fertera, Malathion spray was 
provided timely when the pest incident of gall midges, stem borer and gundi bugs were observed 
in the field. Ridomil Gold spray was given to control the Blast incidence. To control the thrips 
and BPH, Starthene spraying was done based on recommendation.  
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 23 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Techniques used for hybridization 
In order to avoid contamination and to maintain purity of hybrid seed, artificial barrier isolation 
technique was adopted. In the hybridization (AxR) and maintenance (AxB) blocks, tarpaulins 
tied across wooden poles (8 feet height) and covered across length and breadth of the test plots 
for the entries combo was arranged in the field and maintained till harvesting. 
 
Roughing 
 
Off-types, if any, were identified, recorded and removed from the seed production plots during 
cropping season and maximum attention was given at tillering stage, flowering stage and before 
harvesting stages.  
 
Pollination 
Pollination started from 18th of October 2021 and continued 
till mid of November 2021. The rope pulling pollination 
method was adopted and separate rope was used in each 
blocks (A x B & A x R) entry wise for pollination and three 
times each entry was attended daily from 09:00 to 12.30 
noon to get sufficient quantity of hybrid and self-seed. In 
some entries where some non synchronization was observed, 
application of GA 3 and flag leaf clipping methods were followed based on the condition and 
necessarily in order to get synchronization and produce sufficient seed production.  
 
DUS Observations 
All the DUS observations were recorded from 10 randomly selected plants as per DUS guideline 
at appropriate stage of plants in the field record book by the project staffs and same is being 
reciprocated to the excel Data sheet. Seeds of all parental lines (A, B and R line) were sent to 
IIRR, Hyderabad for analysis of quality traits. Data was entered in prescribed excel sheet. 
 
Harvesting and seed submission  
After attaining complete physiological maturity, 
harvesting of A, B & R lines was done. Healthy seeds 
with appropriate moisture content after threshing and 
cleaning were packed and submitted to Gene bank.  
 
 
Due to non-clay type of soil, many efforts like soil, 
silt and FYM incorporation were done. Heavy rainfall after sowing was observed and proper 
drainage facilities were made. Heavy wind caused the isolation barriers damage once and it was 
rectified by providing isolation barrier another time 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 24 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Visit of Project staff :  
During 30th and 31st October 2021; Dr. D.S. Pilania (TA & Co-PI), Sh. Venkateshan, R. (TA) 
and Ms. Anitha Itnal (TA-worked till November 2021) visited ICAR-Indian Institute of Rice 
Research, Hyderabad to attend DUS monitoring. 
 
(B) Cotton 
 
During the reporting year, entries of Cotton were taken up for DUS test as well as production of 
hybrids under project entitled “Stability Analysis, Hybrid 
Seed Production and DUS characterization of parental 
lines of Rice and Cotton ”. Project was led by Dr. Ajay 
Kumar Singh, PVE and Dr. D.S. Pilania, TA respectively as 
Co-Principal Investigators and Sh. Dipal Roy Choudhury, 
Joint Registrar as Principal Investigator. Under the project, 
one Senior Research Fellow (Gururaja, M) and one 
Technical Assistant (Ms. Kavyashree, K R) were recruited 
for handling the cotton crop. Dr Irfan, was also recruited 
under the Rice/Cotton project as SRF (Agronomy). Four YP’s were recruited for 4 months 
duration during selfing and hybridization period of crop growth. 
 
Seed material  
In Kharif 2021, Branch office Shivamogga centre received 190 entries (95 male + 95 female) 
along with 35 entries for second year DUS trial and 19 reference varieties of Cotton from 
PPVFRA, New Delhi for DUS characterization and hybridization as per DUS guideline. 
 
Site description, Soil test, Weather parameters and Plan of work 
The experiment was carried out at DUS testing center, Shivamogga of PPVFRA geographically 
lying in southern transition zone (Zone-7) and located at 
13027’ to 14039’ N latitude and 74037’ to 75052’ E 
longitude with an altitude of 650 m above the MSL. The 
soil of the experimental location was tested and the 
results depicted that the soil was acidic (pH 5.78 and 5.82) 
in nature and has low per cent of organic carbon status.  
Soil amendments like lime application for acidic soil and 
organic manure application for increasing organic carbon 
status of soil were taken. During the cropping season, the 
total rainfall received was 621.6mm. The rainfall received during August-2021 to January-2022 
was highest in the month of August (265.8 mm) followed by September (191.6 mm). The mean 
monthly maximum temperature was highest during November (30.70°C) while, it was least in 
the month of August (27.4 °C). The mean minimum temperature was highest in the month of 
September (20.2 °C) and lowest in the month of December (15.7 °C). The maximum relative 

Annual Report 2021 -22 25 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 humidity was observed in the month of September (83.0 %) and minimum during December 
(64.0 %). Max sunshine hours (8.9 hrs)  were observed in Jan 2022. There was not much 
variation with respect to rainfall distribution during crop growth period. The overall weather 
condition prevailed during the cropping season was normal. 
Total entries were accommodated in an area about 2.5 acre. All the parental lines were sown in 
two replications with each hybrid combination consisting eight rows, four rows of female parents 
and four rows of each male parent with five plants in each row of 2.4 m length with a spacing of 
120 x 60 cm in Hybrid block and 90 x 60 cm in Selfing block. These entries were sown as per 
the approved plan and in each entry, ten plants were selected and DUS observations were 
recorded.  Sowing of all the entries received was done on 05.08.2021 and 06.08.2021. 
 
Crop management  
Recommended dose of fertilizers were applied at timely interval based on crop requirement. 
Nitrogen applied in two splits during sowing and 45 days after sowing and full dose phosphorous 
and potassium applied as basal dose during sowing. Water soluble fertilizers and micronutrients 
were applied through foliar application during the critical 
crop growth period. Plano fix application was taken up to 
reduce the flower and boll drop during crop period. Inter-
cultivation and bullock operations were carried out for 
ridges and furrows formation and earthing up was also 
carried out for better crop stand and growth. Nipping 
operation was carried out by removing the terminal portion 
of the main stem beyond the 15th to 16th node to facilitate 
more sympodial branches to increase boll count during the 
cropping period. All prescribed crop management practices 
and pest control measures were taken up timely and also as and when required for raising the 
healthy crop. 
 
DUS Characterization 
Totally 31 and 37 DUS observations were recorded in diploid and tetraploid cotton, respectively. 
DUS observations were recorded in 67 entries taken up in first year trial and 35 entries of second 
year trial along with 19 reference varieties. Ten plants in each entry were selected at random for 
recording DUS observations according to DUS guidelines at specified stages. DUS readings 
recorded in the field has been transferred to field record book and the same has been entered in to 
the prescribed standard excel sheet format.  Cotton lint of 60 gm per entry was sent to ICAR-
Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, CICR Campus, Coimbatore for fibre 
quality analysis and subsequently the Data, received from them has been transferred to both 
register and standard excel sheets.  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 26 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Hybridization 
Selfing, emasculation and crossing was initiated after square formation from 13.10.2021 to 
10.12.2021. Manual emasculation was done by choosing healthy flower buds of female between 
3.00 to 5.00 pm one day before anthesis. Pollination was carried out next day morning hours 
between 9.00 to 11.00 am by dusting ripen anthers from the selected healthy male flowers. 
Selfing of parental lines and reference varieties was performed by placing butter paper bags on 
un-opened flowers. More than 400 crosses were attempted in each hybrid combinations in order 
to get sufficient F 1 hybrid seeds, which will be used for next year DUS trial. Sufficient selfing 
were also done in each entry including reference varieties and II year DUS trial. 
 
Harvest and Post-harvest operations 
Entry wise harvested cotton was ginned using Cotton Lilliput Ginner to separate cotton lint and 
seeds. Seed cleaning was carried out simultaneously. Harvesting and ginning of all entries was 
carried out from 14.12.2021 to 20.02.2022. F 1 hybrid seeds and parental seeds produced were 
cleaned, weighed and packed in triple layered Aluminium foils and were submitted to National 
Gene Bank, New Delhi on 3rd March, 2022. 
 
Issues faced 
Due to unfavorable weather and climatic conditions like rainfall, heavy wind and long dry 
spell/water scarcity during flowering and hybridization program, it lead to significant flower and 
boll drop in cotton. Issues like leaf reddening due to Mg deficiency, sucking pests, boll worm 
and mirid bug infestation were faced during crop growth period. Remedial measures were taken 
immediately to control them. Pink boll worm infestation was observed after picking of cotton. 
So, simultaneous picking and ginning were carried out to control further seed damage and 
subsequent control measures were taken. 
 
Visits 
 Dr. R.C. Agrawal,  Deputy Director General (Education) ICAR, New Delhi and Vice 
Chancellor, KSNUAHS, Shivamogga visited the field on1/10/2021.  
 Sh. D.R.  Choudhury, Joint Registrar and PI, visited Branch office Shivamogga on 
22/10/2021. 
 Dr. Ashok Dalwai, CEO of National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) in Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare visited the PPVFRA field unit on 12/03/2022. 
 
 
Dr. T. K. Nagarathna , Registrar, PPVFRA, branch In-charge Shivamogga, visited the field on 
24/03/2022.  
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 27 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Project title:  “Hybrid Seed Production/ DUS characterization and testing of Parental lines 
of Maize and Oil seeds”  
(A) Maize 
The project entitled “Hybrid seed production/DUS characterization and testing of of parental 
lines of  Maize and Oilseeds” led by Sh. Dipal Roy Choudhury, 
Principal Investigator & Joint Registrar, PPVFRA, New Delhi, 
Dr. TK Nagarathna, Registrar & Co-PI, PPVFRA, New Delhi, 
Dr. Ajay Kumar Singh, PVE &CO-PI, PPVFRA, Branch Office, 
Shivamogga was started during July, 2019 and being continue d 
at PPVFRA Branch Office, Shivamogga which has been notified 
as DUS testing of parental lines and hybridization testing center 
of different Agricultural and Horticultural crops in India. 
Technical team for DUS evaluation and F 1 seed production under the project includes Sh. 
Chandrasekhara, G. as a Senior Research Fellow and Ms. Pallavi K. R., as a Technical Assistant.  
 
 
Seed material 
During Kharif 2021-22, Branch Office, Shivamogga received 83 
parental entries of maize, out of which 10 hybrid combinations 
for hybrid seed production and DUS evaluation, 30 M/F lines 
for second year DUS evaluation along with 33 reference 
varieties.  
 
Site description, Soil test, Weather parameters and Plan of 
work  
 
The soil of the experimental location at DUS testing center, Shivamogga was tested for its 
texture and nature which revealed that due to silt predominated over sand and clay in the soil, a 
silt loam texture with a slightly acidic pH (5.8) was observed. To overcome the acidic nature of 
the soil, the application of lime was recommended and the same was taken in the field of maize 
trial. During the crop season Kharif-2021, the average temperature ranged from 18.87°C to 29.28 
°C, with an average of 24.08°C at the experimental site. The highest and lowest temperatures 
recorded during the crop-growing season were in Nov-2021 (30.70°C) and December-
2021(15.7°C), respectively. Similarly, the greatest precipitation (5.5 mm/day) and relative 
humidity (93%) noticed in Nov & Dec-2021 and September 2021, respectively. The entries were 
accommodated in an area about 1600 m2 as per the approved plan with two replications. Each 
hybrid combination consisting a pair of rows i.e. two rows of female parent and two rows of  
male parent with twenty plants in each row of 4 m length at a spacing of 75 x 20 cm. 33 
reference lines were raised in two rows for each with two replications. The sowing of all entries 
received was done on 29/07/2021. 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 28 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Crop management 
 
As per the recommended package of practices of 
KSNUAHS, Shivamogga, intercultural operations 
including thinning, weeding to control weeds, bullock 
operated intercultural operation; irrigation to achieve 
optimum moisture for crop growth, earthing up to 
provide support to crop and control weeds, application 
of recommended dose of fertilizers as basal and top 
dressing at two splits to provide the essential macro 
nutrients to the crop were done in time. Furthermore, 
plant protection measures including timely foliar application of Emamectin Benzoate/Coragen 
/prophenophos to control stem borer & fall army worm were practiced and also to overcome Zn 
deficiency in maize, Zinc sulphate was applied to soil as well as foliar Zn application.  
 
Hybrid and selfed seed production 
 
The hybridization and selfing activity in maize during Kharif 2021 trial was started at 57 DAS 
(i.e. on 18-09-2021) and performed for a period of 22 days (i.e. till 07.10.2021) to generate F 1 
seeds from the 10 hybrid combinations and selfed seeds of 10 hybrid entries of first year DUS 
trial, 15 hybrid entries of second year DUS trial and 33 reference varieties.  
 
Post-harvest processes 
After attaining physiological maturity, parental lines, hybrids and reference lines of maize were 
harvested separately from 14-12 -2021 to 16-12-2021. The cobs were threshed; kernels were 
winnowed, cleaned and sundried for another 2 to 3 days till the 
seed moisture content attained 8 per cent. The hybrid and selfed 
seeds were weighed and packed. The selfed (of 10 hybrid 
combinations, i.e. 20 parents) and F 1 hybrid (of 10 hybrid 
combinations) seeds of maize generated during Kharif-2021 at 
PPVFRA Branch Office, Shivamogga submitted phase wise to 
National Gene Bank, New Delhi on 03.03.2022 and 21.03.2021 
respectively. 
 
 
The issues faced during the Kharif-2021 in maize 
Issues like rotting of seeds during germination in the field, severe damage caused to germinate d 
seedlings due to attack of natural enemies (birds, rats and squirrels), heavy & continuous rainfall 
after sowing of crop, rotting of selfed and crossed cobs, leaching of micro and macro nutrients, 
nutrient deficiency for  Zn & Mg were observed and  heavy infestation of insect pests (fall army 
worm & cob borer) were faced for which timely remedial measures were followed during the 
entire crop cycle.  

Annual Report 2021 -22 29 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 DUS test and DUS Data 
Overall crop stand and expression of DUS trial was ideal. A total of 31 DUS characters were 
observed and recorded during eight growth stages on randomly tagged ten plants of each of 
parental lines and reference varieties in each replication according to the DUS guidelines of 
PPVFRA for maize. All the readings recorded in the field (DATA record sheets) was 
reciprocated from DATA register into standard excel sheets and submitted to PI of the project for 
further purpose on 09.06.2022. 
 
Visits 
Dr. Ajay Kumar, PVE & Co-PI and Mr. Chandrashekhara, G. SRF, visited SRTC, Hyderabad to 
participate in maize DUS monitoring program on 05.10.2021 .  
Sh. Dipal Roy Choudhury, Joint Registrar and PI visited maize trial field at DUS Testing Center, 
PPVFR Authority, Branch Office, Shivamogga during Kharif 2021-22 for review purpose on 
22.10.2021.  
 
 (B) SUNFLOWER  
 
The project entitled “Hybrid seed production/DUS characterization and testing of parental lines 
of Maize and Oilseeds” led Dr. T K Nagarathna, Registrar, New Delhi and assisted by Dr. Ajay 
Kumar Singh, PVE & Co-PI, PPVFRA, Branch Office, Shivamogga was started during July, 
2019 and being continued at PPVFRA Branch Office, Shivamogga which has been notified as 
DUS testing of parental lines and hybridization testing center of different Agricultural and 
Horticultural crops in India. Technical team for DUS evaluation and F 1 seed production under 
the project includes Sh. Chandrasekhara, G. as a Senior Research Fellow and Ms. Pallavi K. R., 
as a Technical Assistant. 
 
Site description, soil test, weather parameters, seed material and plan of work  
During Rabi-2021-22, Branch Office Shivamogga received one each ABR entries (i.e., 1 A line 
+ 1 B line + 1 R line) along with 6 reference lines for second year DUS testing. The acidic nature 
(slightly acidic pH-5.8) of soil of the experimental location revealed by the soil test and to 
overcome that the soil application of lime was performed. During the crop cycle, Temperatures 
ranged from 17.02°C to 30.80°C, with an average of 23.91°C at the experimental site. Rainfall 
was 32.84 mm on average. The highest and lowest temperatures observed during the crop-
growing season were in February-2022 (34.7°C) and December-2021(15.7°C), respectively. 
Similarly, the greatest precipitation (5.9 mm/day) and relative humidity (92%) were noticed in 
February-2022 and October- 2021, respectively. The entries were sown on 08-10 -2021 as per the 
approved plan with 3 replications. All ABR lines were sown in 4 rows each i.e., four rows for A 
line, four rows for B line and four rows for R line with 13 plants in each row of 4 m length with a 
spacing of 60 x 30 cm. The same spacing was followed for 6 reference lines too.  
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 30 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Crop management  
 
After thorough land preparation, sowing was done by hand dibbling of seeds with one seed per 
hill and the plot was irrigated. The recommended doses of fertilizers (60 N, 80 P 2O5 and 60 K 2O 
kg/ha) was given to the crop. The entire dose of P 2O5, K2O and half of nitrogen was applied as 
basal dose and remaining half of the nitrogen was top dressed at fourth week after planting. 
Intercultural operations viz., thinning, hand weeding, earthing up and staking were performed 
during crop growth cycle in Rabi-2021-22. Furthermore, irrigation was provided at weekly 
interval to crop until maturity stage.  Crop protection measures like foliar application of 
Imidacloprid and Coragen to control sucking pest and leaf 
eating caterpillar respectively.  
 
Hybrid and selfed seed production 
The hybridization and selfing activity 
in sunflower during Rabi-2021 trial 
was started at 54 DAS (i.e. on 01-12 -
2021) and performed for a period of 
16 days (i.e. till 17.12.2021) to 
generate seeds for maintenance (AXB) and selfed seeds of R line and 
6 reference varieties.  
 
Post-harvest processes 
After attaining physiological maturity, heads of R line, AXB cross, and reference lines of 
sunflower were harvested separately. After post-harvest activities and sun drying, the hybrid and 
self-seeds were weighed and packed. Since the trial was for second year DUS trial, the seeds 
generated were burnt after the completion of DUS evaluation. 
 
Lodging of sunflower plants due to heavy rain, infestation of sucking pests were the major issues 
faced for which recommended timely remedial measures were performed.  
 
DUS test and DUS Data 
 
A total of 34 DUS characters were observed and recorded 
during four growth stages on randomly tagged ten plants of each 
of ABR lines and reference varieties in each replication 
according to the DUS guidelines of PPVFRA for sunflower. All 
the readings recorded in the field was reciprocated from DATA 
register into standard excel sheets. 
Visits 
Dr. Sharanabasappa Deshmukh, Entomologist, KSNUAHS, 
Shivamogga were consulted to diagnose and prescribed 

Annual Report 2021 -22 31 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 remedial measure for the trial in Sunflower.  
 
(C) INDIAN MUSTARD 
 
The project entitled “ Hybrid seed production/DUS characterization and testing of parental lines 
ofMaize and Oilseeds ” led Dr. T K Nagarathna, Registrar, New Delhi, Dr. Ajay Kumar Singh, 
PVE & Co-PI, PPVFRA, Branch Office, Shivamogga was started during July, 2019 and being 
continued at PPVFRA Branch Office, Shivamogga which has been notified as DUS testing of 
parental lines and hybridization testing center of different Agricultural and Horticultural crops in 
India. Technical team for DUS evaluation and F 1 seed production under the project includes Sh. 
Chandrasekhara, G. as a Senior Research Fellow and Ms. Pallavi K. R., as a Technical Assistant. 
 
Seed material, plan of work, site description, soil test and weather parameters, 
The experimental material was comprised of A, B and R lines of single entry and three reference 
varieties of Indian mustard, Each of which raised in 4 lines of 4 m row length with the spacing of 
45×15 cm of inter and intra row spacing in three replications in a RCBD experimental design as 
per the guidelines of PPVFRA for DUS characterization and hybrid seed production at DUS 
Testing Centre, Branch office, PPVFRA, Shivamogga The sowing of all the entries was done on 
10.11.2021. The soil of the experimental location was tested for its texture and nature which 
revealed that due to silt predominated over sand and clay in the soil, a silt loam texture with a 
slightly acidic pH (5.8) was observed. To overcome the acidic nature of the soil, application of 
lime was recommended and the same was taken in the field of mustard trial. During Rabi 2021-
22, temperatures ranged from 17.18°C to 31.78°C, with an average of 24.48°C at the 
experimental site. Rainfall totaled 3.8mm on average. The highest and lowest temperatures 
observed during the crop-growing season were in March 2022(34.7°C) and December 
2021(15.7°C), respectively. Similarly, the max precipitation (6.3mm/day) and relative humidity 
(88%) recorded in March-2022 and December-2021, respectively. 
 
Crop management  
The recommended dose of NPK fertilizers is 60:40:40 kg; compost was added during field 
preparation. For better efficiency, half of the nitrogen and full doses of phosphorous and potash 
and remaining dose of nitrogen were applied as basal and split application at the time of sowing 
and at the first irrigation. Intercultural operations like earthing up combined with hand hoeing 
(weeding) and mulching with rice straw were followed which helps in soil moisture 
conservation, weed control, maintenance of soil temperature, thorough mixing of applied manure 
with soil. The irrigations at weekly interval were provided to crop until maturity stage.  Zinc 
sulphate, wettable sulphur, boron, gypsum, magnesium sulphate applied as foliar application to 
meet the requirements of micronutrients in mustard. Foliar Spray of Humic Acid (2.5gm/lit) & 
soil application of Humic Acid mixed with FYM resulted increased vegetative growth in 
mustard. Crop protection measures like foliar application of Chloropyriphos and Acephate to 
Annual Report 2021 -22 32 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 control mustard sawfly and aphids respectively, and drenching of COC (3gm/lit) combined with 
soil application of lime to control club root of mustard are performed. 
 
Hybrid and selfed seed production 
The hybridization and selfing activity in mustard during Rabi-2021 trial was started at 49 DAS 
and performed for a period of 27 days to generate F 1 seeds from the one A x R hybrid 
combination, seeds for maintenance (AxB) and selfed seeds of R line and 3 reference varieties.  
 
Post-harvest processes 
After attaining physiological maturity, silique of R line, B line (AxB), AxR hybrids and 
reference lines of mustard were harvested separately from 28.02.2022.After post-harvest 
activities, the dried seeds the hybrid and self-seeds were weighed and packed. Following this, 
seeds of hybrid, maintainer line, selfed seeds of B & R lines and selfed seeds of 3 reference 
varieties were submitted to National Gene Bank, New Delhi on 21.3.2022.  
 
Various hurdles faced in mustard during Rabi 2021-22  has been categorised as follows: 
 Crop growth hurdles: Notable infestation of 
insect-pests (mustard sawfly & mustard aphids) 
and diseases (club root) were faced and timely-
recommended protection measures were 
followed.  
 Stunted growth of plants from seedling to 
flowering stage was noticed, to overcome this, 
measure like soil application of 95 % water 
soluble humic and fulvic acid accompanied with soil and FYM in 1:1:1 ratio was taken.   
 DUS test and Hybrid development related hurdles: Stunted growth of R-line during pod 
development, reduction in cross success due to human movement between two rows 
which distanced at a row- to-row distance of 45cm.  
 
DUS test and DUS Data 
A total of 24 DUS characters were observed and recorded during eight growth stages on 
randomly tagged ten plants of each of ABR lines and reference varieties in each replication 
according to the DUS guidelines of PPVFRA for mustard. All the readings recorded in the field 
(Data record sheets) was reciprocated from Data register into standard 
excel sheets. 
 
Visits 
 Dr. Sharanabasappa Deshmukh, Entomologist, KSNUAHS, 
Shivamogga visited the plots and advised about treatment for the  sawfly 
and mustard aphid infestation  
 Dr. T. K. Nagarathna, Registrar, PPVFR Authority, New Delhi 

Annual Report 2021 -22 33 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 made visit to at DUS Testing Centre, PPVFRA, Branch Office, Shivamogga. 
 
 2.3. 2.  Branch Office, Palampur 
Farmer variety of Blackgram ( Vigna mungo  L.) KDM1 was received through Director of 
Research CSK HPKV, Palampur which was submitted after proper checking of the appliaction 
with registration PVP PL No. 0803220001 to PPVFR, Authority, New Delhi. 
 
Following notified, farmers’ and new varieties were received from Directorate of Research, CSK 
HPKV, Palampur and were submitted to the PPVFR Authority, New Delhi for registration as per 
details given below: 
 
Sr. 
No.  Name of Crop  Denomination  PVP PL 
1. Rice (Oryza sativa ) GOSHA DHAN  0102220002  
2. Rice (Oryza sativa ) Phool Patas  0102220001  
3.  Bread wheat ( Triticum aestivum  L.) HIM Palam Gehun -3 
(HPW-373) 0301220001  
4.  Barley (Hordeum vulgare  L.) Him Palam Jau 1 (HBL 
713) 0301220002  
5.  Kidney bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris L.) Marwah Rajma (MR -01) 2102220001  
 
2.3.3.  Branch Office, Pune:  
 
 
Participation in “ India’s Premier Agri Summit-12th Agrivision” at Reshambagh ground, 
Nagpur, Maharashtra  
 
Applications for registration of twentysix varieties were received and communicated to the 
Registry for further processing by Branch office, Pune. The details of varieties submitted are as 
follows:   

Annual Report 2021 -22 34 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Category Public Sector  Private Sector  Farmers 
New 03 -- -- 
Extant Notified  01 -- -- 
Extant VCK  11 -- -- 
Extant Farmers  -- -- 06 
 
2.3.4. PPVFR Authority, Branch Office Guwahati 
 
The branch office, Guwahati of Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
started functioning from the campus of Assam Agriculture University, Khanapara, Guwahati 
with the Jurisdiction of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, 
Mizoram and Tripura. 
 
 During the reporting period, one farmer variety application was forwarded to Director 
Research AAU for characterization. 
 Deputy Registrar participated in on-site verification committee in respect of Plant 
Genome Saviour Community Awardee namely, Dansuri Agril Co Operative Society, 
Village Langsanti, PO Sarihajan, Dist. Karbi Anglong, Assam 782470 on 21-10-2022. 
 
2.3.5. PPVFR Authority, Branch Office Ranchi 
 
The branch office, Ranchi of Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority started 
functioning from Birsa Agriculture University Campus, S -2, 
Kanke, Ranchi  with the jurisdiction of Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  
 
 During the reporting period, one Extant variety application was received at branch office.  
 
 During the reporting period branch office Ranchi has received 4 applications for Plant 
Genome Saviour Community Award, Plant Genome Savior Farmer Reward and 
Recognition. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 35 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 Deputy Registrar participated in Exhibition of IITF-2021 at Pragati Maidan on November 
23, 2021. 
 
 Deputy Registrar participated in “Agrovision Uttar Pradesh 2021” at ICAR- IISR, 
Lucknow, UP from 16 to 18 December, 2021. 
 
 Deputy Registrar participated in “India’s Premier Agri Summit 12th Agrivision at 
Reshambagh Ground, Nagpur, Maharashtra, from 24 to 27 December, 2021. 
 
 
Participation in “ Agrovision Uttar Pradesh 2021” 
 
 2.4 REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES 
 
During 2021-22, registration process is completed and certificates were issued for 475 varieties 
under different crop species (Fig) with maximum number of certificates issued under Extant 
NotifiesVariety 156 followed by New category (137), Farmer (128) and VCK (54). Similarly, 
highest number of certificates were issued for cereals (312) followed by fibre crops (55), 
vegetables (38), legumes (29), Oilseeds (14), Flowers (07), Trees (07), fruits (06), Cucurbits 
(04), Spices (02) and Medicinal & Aromatic Plants (1). 
Table 2.8: No. of certificates issued crop group-wise (2021-22) 
 
Crop group  No. of certificate 
issued Crop group  No of certificate 
issued 
Cereals 312 Fruits 06 
Vegetables  38 Cucurbits 4 
Fibre crops  55 Spices 02 
Oilseeds 14 Medicinal & Aromatic Plants 01 
Legumes 29 
Total 475 Flowers 07 
Trees 07 

Annual Report 2021 -22 36 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 3: DUS Test Centers  
3.1 DUS TESTING CENTERS ESTABLISHED UNDER SECTION 19   OF PPVFR ACT 
2001 AND   RULE   29 (7) of PPVFR RULES, 2003 IN GOVERNMENT OWNED 
NATIONAL AGRICUTLURAL RESEARCH SYSTEM.  
 During the period under report  497 double coded candidate varieties  representing  37 crop 
species were tested for DUS characterization  and evaluation at  47 centres  in the country. These 
centres are established at locations most suitable either under Central Government or State 
Government owned agricultural research systems comprising the ICAR, CSIR, SAU or CAU. 
Dedicated research staff a nd support were provided as required, to maintain under the control of 
a designated Principal Investigator nominated by the Head of the Institution at each centre to 
operate for the testing and evaluation procedures required under the Act, in project mode with 
the approval of the Authority . The summarised results are as follows: - 
 
3.1.1.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR RICE:  
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF RICE RESEARCH, HYDERABAD 
DUS testing of 35 new candidate varies and 2 VCKs (along 
with F1 seed received from Shivamogga) of 2nd year, 24 
new candidate varieties (including 7 EDVs) of 1st year were 
tested along with 12 reference varieties. The 
characterization of 65 Farmers varieties were carried out 
during kharif 2021at ICAR-Indian Institute of Rice 
Research, Hyderabad as per the guidelines and were 
characterized for all DUS descriptors. A total of 250 
Reference collections of varieties (RCV’s) were also grown 
for multiplication during Rabi season.  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Rice 24 35 2 65 30/10/2021  
 
The sowing of nursery was done on 8.7.2021(2nd year), 
23.7.2021(1st year) & 15.7.2021(FVs). Later, 25-28 days 
old seedlings were transplanted in the main field on 
2.8.2021 & 3.8.2021(2nd year), 21.8.2021(1st year) and 
13.8.2021(FVs). The grouping characters (basal leaf 
sheath color, D50%F, stem length, decorticated grain 
length, grain type, grain color, amylose content and grain 

Annual Report 2021 -22 37 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 aroma) among the entries were mostly uniform.  
The monitoring team consisted of Dr. L.V. Subba Rao, Principal Scientist/Nodal Officer, Dr. J. 
Aravind Kumar, Principal Scientist/Co-Nodal Officer, Dr. Jyothi Badri, Senior Scientist/Co-
Nodal Officer from ICAR-IIRR, Hyderabad along with representatives from PPVFRA, ICAR-
IARI RS, Karnal, ICAR-NRRI and online monitoring was done. 
The team opined that grain features should be recorded as per prescribed in DUS guidelines and 
variability if any be recorded accordingly. 
 
ICAR-NATIONAL RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE, CUTTACK 
The experiment was carried out in Kharif-2021 for 
DUS testing which had several unique results. All the 
data from morphological to biochemical analysis were 
recorded on proper growth stage of crop by following 
proper guidelines of the Authority. Selfing was done 
in all purelines for stability analysis in the next year of 
testing. All the entries varied widely for both 
qualitative and quantitative characters. These data 
were computerized in proper format and sent to 
PPVFRA. The data of reference varieties, local and 
regional checks which were grown against the candidate varieties and FVs 2nd Year were also 
sent to PPV &FRA.  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year entries  2nd year  entries  
Rice 30 entries 27 entries 2 5 05.11.2021  
 
A set of 80 (20 FVs for 1st year testing, 31 Candidates for 1st year testing and 29 Candidates for 
2nd year testing) rice variety received from PPV & FRA, New Delhi. Germination test results 
were taken after one week of receiving of seed packets. 1st year FVs, 1st year Candidate and 2nd 
year Candidate were sown in the nursery on 16.06.21, 26.06.21 and 28.06.21 and transplanted on 
27.07.2021, 29.07.2021 and 2.08.2021 respectively with randomized block design in three 
replications as per the standard recommended DUS test guideline. Coleoptile colour  was 
recorded after 7 days of sowing. The crop started attaining flowering in the month of September-
October. All the data (Quantitative and qualitative) from morphological to biochemical analysis 
were recorded in the appropriate growth stage of crop. Selfing was done in FVs 1st year and 4 
typical 1st year candidates and selfed seed was collected and stored for the next year testing. A 
total of 42 reference varieties, 16 local checks and 19 regional checks were used against the 
candidates and 2nd year FVs having fulfilled the demanded characters. All  the data were recorded 

Annual Report 2021 -22 38 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 in the proper format provided by the authority and send to PPV & FRA, New Delhi on 11th 
April, 2022. 
All the entries were having erect culm attitude except 2122-28 and 2880/3491  (semi erect). 
Only FV 2880/3494  was found to have very strong Lemma anthocyanin colouration of keel and 
Lemma anthocyanin colouration below apex. Only FV 2880/3490  were found to have droopy flag 
leaf attitude of blade in early observation. Only 20RII-H38  Candidate hybrid was showing 
maximum panicle length of main axis. Among candidate 1st year, only  2122H12 was found to 
have horizontal flag leaf attitude of blade in late observation. Variety 2122-28, 2122-29 and 
2880/3488  were found to have gold and gold furrow lemma and palea colour. Among 2nd year 
candidates, only 20RII-H12  were found to have semi erect attitude of secondary branches. Among 
all the entries FV 2880/3490  was found to have maximum 1000 GW(35g) and FV 2880/3491  was 
having very low 1000 GW(11g).Grain phenol reaction was present in all entries except 
2122H21 ,2122H25 , 2880/3491  and 2880/3494 . Maximum and minimum grain length was found 
in 20RII-H38 (11.03mm) and 2880 /3491(5.76) respectively. Maximum and minimum grain width 
was found in  2880/3480 (3.21) and 20RII-H13 (1.98) respectively. Entries 20RII-H19 (8.15mm) 
and 20RII-H38 (7.82mm) was found to have very long decorticated grain. Entries 
2122H16 (2.63mm) and 2880/3480 (2.73) was found to have broad decorticated grain. Only entries 
2122H25 , 2122-26, 20RII-H13 , 20RII-H51  were having short slender decorticated grain. Only 
entries 20RII-H38  and 20RII-H19  were found to have extra long slender decorticated grain. 
Among all the entries 2122-26, 2880/3490  and 2880/3480  were found to have light brown, light 
red and dark purple decorticated grain respectively. Only entries 2122H17 (30.75) and 
2122H18 (1.575) were found to have maximum and minimum content of amylase respectively. 
Aroma was present in all FVs 1st year. Low alkali spreading value was found in 2122-30, 20RII-
H17 and 2877/2328 . 
Out of 64 entries 14 candidates 1st year, 23 Candidates 2nd year were found to be uniform 
with respect to all the DUS characters. Most of the varieties were showing variation in stem 
length, panicle length, panicle number/plant, leaf width, leaf length, grain length, decorticated 
grain length, decorticated grain width. Maximum numbers of offtypes were seen in 2122H22 , 
2122-28, 2122-30 in all three replications. All FVs were found to be non-uniform with respect to 
two or three quantitative characters. Heterogenous plant populations were found in 2880/3488 (fv 
1st year). In this variety 50% plant population was having long grain type of spikelet and while 
another 50 % population was having short grain type of spikelet. 
All the candidate hybrids were found to be similar with their F1 Shimoga with respect to 
all the DUS characters except a few differences in plant height, Maturity and culm attitude were 
seen.  
Due to COVID-19, the monitoring of DUS plot of ICAR-NRRI was conducted through 
virtual (online) mode on 05.11.2021 which includes Monitoring Team, Project In-charge, HODs 
and related staffs.  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 39 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
ICAR-INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (REGIONAL STATION), 
KARNAL  
 
DUS testing of seven candidate varieties (CVs) and 10 Farmers 
varieties (FVs) were undertaken during Kharif 2021 at IARI RS, 
Karnal. Five FVs (2886/2402, 2887/2021, 2887/2020, 2887/2054 
and 2881/3945) were under first year testing and another five 
FVs (Saraikela, Panisayir, Badka Gora, Dhuchri Dhan and 
Rameshwar Vishnu Bhog ) were under 2nd year testing. The seven 
CVs and ten FVs were raised along with seventeen reference 
varieties and seven zonal and national checks. In addition, 15 reference varieties (RVs) were also 
maintained during Kharif 2021. 
Another trial on “EDVs vis a vis IV: Herbicide Trial”  of candidate varieties was also 
conducted as per prescribed protocol under transplanted conditions at IARI, RS, Karnal during 
Kharif 2021. Virtual online monitoring of DUS Trials was 
conducted by Joint Registrar, PPVFRA, New Delhi on 
18.10.2021. DUS Data and Test Report of candidate Varieties, 
Farmers Varieties, Reference Varieties and data of maintenance 
of reference varieties along with the EDV vs IV Herbicide trial 
report had already been submitted to Nodal Officer (DUS), 
IIRR, Hyderabadand to Joint Registrar, PPVFRA, New Delhi 
 
TNAU, COIMBATORE 
 
In rice DUS testing is carried out for 72 
entries (Ist year entries -17, IInd year entries 
-12 & Farmers variety - 43) as per the DUS 
guidelines. In addition, maintenance and 
characterization of ADT 53, ADT 54, CO 52, CO 53 and CR 
1009 Sub 1 was carried out.  
Some of the entries in farmers’ varieties seeds of few entries 
showed very poor germination. Otherwise candidate entries 
showed uniformity and stability. Little or no deviation 
between the candidate hybrid with F1 SMG were observed. 
Off types were present in one entry however, they are within 
prescribed limit.        
 Crops New FV 
1st year 
entries 2nd year 
entries 
Rice 17 12 43 

Annual Report 2021 -22 40 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 INDIRA GANDHI KRISHI VISHWAVIDYALAYA, RAIPUR  
 
Total 13 farmers’ varieties (including 8 Farmer 
Varieties characterized in 2020) were evaluated for 
DUS performance. Overall trial condition was good. 
The date of sowing of seed materials was 
06/07/2021and the materials were transplanted on 
25/07/2021. 
In the season of Kharif 2021-22 we have received total 
05 farmers’ varieties for DUS testing. Out of these 04 
varieties were fully germinated and 01 (one) variety 
was partially germinated and completed morphological characterization of all the 05 varieties. 
Online monitoring was done on 28-10 -2021. Six (06) out of 08 varieties were uniform for all the 
traits. The remaining two varieties viz. Reg/2016/1170 and Reg/2018/652 had seed mixture and 
did not show uniformity for traits. One entry, Reg/2017/2260 was observed to be unique for 
multiple traits  like purple leaf sheath, purple ligule, distribution of anthocyanin colouration on 
leaf margins with strong anthocyanin colouration on leaf sheath, purple stigma. It was short 
heighted and medium in duration with late leaf senescence. 
 
 ICAR-NEH RESEARCH STATION, LAMPHELPET, MANIPUR 
During 2020-21, first year DUS characterization was carried out for 25 farmer varieties of rice 
along with five reference varieties namely, Mahamaya, Prasanna, Nidhi, RC Maniphou-11  and 
RC Maiphou-13. The experiment was carried out in randomized complete block design with 
three replications under rainfed lowland transplanted condition. 
Observations were recorded for 48 morphological characters and 14 
post harvest characters. In comparison to reference varieties, entry 
2886/2239 found distinct  for twelve traits namely, presence of basal 
leaf sheath colour, highest leaf pubescence of blade surface, leaf 
coloration of auricles(purple), leaf colouration of collar(present), stem 
length (141-151.7 cm), 
presence of anthocyanin 
coloration of internodes, few 
panicle number per plant (<11 no.), strong secondary 
branching, higher 1000 grain weight(≥28g), grain shape 
being short bold, white decorticated grain color and 
presence of decorticated grain aroma. Entry(s) 
2886/9198 , 2886/2208, 2886/2237 & 2886/2198 were found distinct for seven traits namely leaf 
coloration of auricles (light purple & purple), leaf colouration of collar(present), yellow & purple 
spikelet colour of stigma, high secondary branching, absence and present of grain phenol 

Annual Report 2021 -22 41 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 reaction of lemma, short grains with short bold grain shape. The varieties were uniform in their 
characteristics across three replications. Among them, the lines RCMANIPHOU-6(RCM-5) and 
RCMANIPHOU-11 (RCM-11) were found to be distinct in fewcharacters in comparisons with 
reference variety. 
 
ICAR NEH REGIONAL STATION, NAGALAND  
ICAR, Nagaland Centre received a total of 23 
entries from the PPV & FRA, New Delhi in the 
year 2021-22. These 23 entries along with Gundri 
Bhog (REG/2013/757) received in the year 2020-
21, were evaluated with 3 checks, RCM-9, Pusa 
Sughand and Ranjit during kharif season in 
lowland ecology. The layout and spacing of the 
field was prepared according to the DUS 
guidelines. Observations were recorded for the 62 
DUS characters on 10 randomly selected plants. 
All the entries were found to be distinct from the 
check varieties. Twenty farmers’ varieties were DUS characterized for registration. A total of 
three varieties, RCM 9, Pusa Sughand and Ranjit are under maintenance breeding and this year 
we have collected four varieties from Sikkim. Collection of few more rice varieties of NEH 
region is under progress. A total of 58 rice landraces were collected from Mesulumi, Kikruma, 
Losami, Sakraba, P futseromi, Khomi, Porba, Enhulumi and Chobama villages of Phek district, 
Nagaland. However, there were high incidences of bird damage in rice fields at ICAR Nagaland 
centre, Medziphema during the crop season. 
 
Table 3.1: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22: 
 
Crops New FV Date of 
online 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year  
entries 
Rice 23 entries 
received from 
PPV & FRA, 
New Delhi 
during 2021  The entry, 
REG/2013/757  
received in the 
year 2020  
 Total=24 (1 entry in 
2020 + 23 entries in 
2021). 
So finally 24 
candidate varieties 
were evaluated for 
DUS testing . 27/10/2021  
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 42 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.2: List of rice landraces submitted for registration with PPV & FRA 
 
Sl. 
No
. Denomination  Ecology Farmer's 
Name Address Geographical Co -
ordinates  Altitude 
(in 
metres)  
 
Endorsed 
by 
Village District Latitude Longitude  
1 Muchihalü  Lowland 1. Shekhocuyi  
Sakrab
a 
Phek 25.6169 94.3614 4440 Dr. Azeze 
Seyie 
(Scientist);    
Dr. Harendra 
Verma 
(Scientist)  
Plant 
Breeding & 
Genetics ;  
Dr. D. J. 
Rajkhowa 
(Joint 
Director) 
ICAR 
Research 
Complex for 
NEH 
Region, 
Nagaland 
Centre, 
Medziphema 
-797106, 
Nagaland  2. Thunosolü  
3. Zashehulü  
4. Shezopralü  
2 Matikhu Lowland 1. Shevotolü  
2. Cusazolü  
3. Veculü  
4. Ciekroveyi  
3 Porari Lowland 1. Zhoduyi  
2. Muramu  
3. Khoto 
4. Vemutha  
4 Mudotsuri  Lowland 1. Suhlüpo  
2. Veduculü  
3. Thunohulü  
5 Nejulü Lowland 1. Kukuhulü  
2. Nuvekholü  
3. Tsüno 
4. Vemuralü  
6 Vepratso Ri  Lowland 1. Kuvevolü  
2. Abino 
3.Vezhoshelü  
4. Suhlüpo  
7  Nyode Lowland 1. Zavekho  
2. Vemuralü  
3. Veposwulü  
8 Khrumube  Lowland 1. Kewengu  
Mesul
umi 25.5787 94.3417 156 2. Zolhi 
Venuh 
3. Awele 
9 Visapu Rübe  Lowland 1. Kewengu  
2. Khwetsolou  
3. Awele 
4. Huzumo  
10 Kehabe Mena  Lowland 1. Kewengu  
Annual Report 2021 -22 43 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2. Khwetsolou  
3. Zolhi 
4. Awele 
11 Pelhi-u Rübe Lowland 1. Kewengu  
2. Awele 
3. Zolhi 
4. Khwetsolou  
12 Tangu Lowland/
Upland 1. Kewengu  
2. Khwetsolou  
3. Zolhi 
4. Awele 
13 Nade Lowland 1. Kewengu  
2. Khwetsolou  
3. Zolhi 
4. Awele 
14 Neingutsu 
Rübe Lowland 1. Kewengu  
2. Khwetsolou  
3. Awele 
15 Neqha 
Kumukao  Lowland 1. Theyecülü  
Khomi 25.5869 94.3761 154 2. Vecühülü  
3. Venekholü  
16 Node Lowland 1. Theyecülü  
2. Vecühülü  
3. Venekholü  
17 Nerie Kucho -o Lowland 1. Mhasheyi  
2. Venekholü  
3. Vejilü 
4. Dzutholü  
18 Hüsüsa Ha  Lowland 1. Mhasheyi  
2. Dzutholü  
3. Venekholü  
19 Nerie Lowland 1. Venekholü  
2. Mhasheyi  
3. Dzutholü  
20 Teivelü Ha  Lowland 1. Vejilü 
2. Mhasheyi  
3. Venekholü  
4. Zholü 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 44 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.2.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR COTTON:  
 
 MAHATMA PHULE KRISHI VISWA VIDYALAYA (COTTON), RAHURI 
During Kharif 2021, at Cotton Improvement Project MPKV, Rahuri ( DUS center for Cotton), 
there were 6 new hybrids for 1st year, 31 extant VCKs, New and their 29 F1 SMG hybrids for 2nd 
year under central zone trial, and 14 (Extant VCK, New and EDV) with 14 F1 SMG hybrids  
were tested for  2nd Year as a candidates varieties.  
Due to ongong Covid Pandemic issues, monitoring was conducted online on 16th 
November, 2021, with the participation of Dr. K. Rathinavel, (Principal Scientist, CICR, 
Coimbatore); Dr. V.B. Amolik (Head, Dept  of Agril. Botany MPKV, Rahuri); Dr. R.S. Wagh 
(Cotton Breeder, MPKV, Rahuri); Dr. V. Santhy, (Principal Scientist, CICR, Nagpur) and Joint 
Registrar, PPVFRA, New Delhi. All observations were recorded and results were submitted in 
stipulated time with photograph of field. The performance of tested varieties was uniform, 
satisfactory and good upto harvesting. 
Most of the entries were found uniform and stable, except one entry showed differences 
in few characters in candidate hybrid as compared to F1 SMG hybrid. It may be noted that high 
rainfall during flowering stage cause flower and boll dropping, excess moisture affected boll 
opening and more infestation of pink bollworm at latter stage of crop, hence overall productivity 
of cotton decreased during Kharif 2021. The trial included few of the national and common Bt 
hybrids, e.g., Ajeet-155, Ajeet-199, Ajeet-1155, Dhandev, Rasi-659, Rasi Magic, NCS-9011, 
Phule 688, Phule Yamuna, Phule Suman, Asha. 
Centre has maintained following reference varieties received from CICR Coimbatore, 
performance of reference varieties were found satisfactory, DUS characters of reference varieties 
were recorded and maintained purity of particular varieties by roughing and selfing by avoiding 
the contamination.  
Table 3.3: List Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
 Sr. 
No.  Name of Reference 
Varieties  Sr. 
No.  Name of Reference 
Varieties  Sr. 
No.  Name of Reference 
Varieties  
1 MCU-10 30 SAHANA  59 G.C0T.16  
2 H-1098 31 KHANDWA -3 60 MCU-12 
3 MCU-3 32 NH-452 61 JLH-168 
4 SUMAN 33 GSHV-112 62 G.COT.16  
5 MCU-11 34 G.COT.18  63 PRS-74 
6 REBA-B-50 35 MCU-7 64 MCU-4 
7 HLS-329 36 DEVIRAJ  65 SUJATHA  
8 LH-900 37 ABADHITA  66 H-974 
Annual Report 2021 -22 45 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 9 MCU-13 38 MCU-9 67 H-1220 
10 SUPRIYA  39 LAKSHMI  68 LRA-5166 
11 AKH-07R 40 G. COT.12  69 SUMANGALA  
12 JK-4 41 KANCHANA  70 L-604 
13 AH-107 42 BADNAWAR -1 71 NARASIMHA  
14 NH-545 43 SUMAN GALA  72 F-846 
15 MCU-5 44 GUJRAT -67 73 BIKANERI NERMA  
16 RMPBS-155 45 J-34 74 SUMAN 
17 PH-93 46 DHY-286-1 75 ANJALI 
18 RCH-001 47 LH-1556 76 BANDAWAR  
19 F-1378 48 BUNNY-FEMALE  77 VIKRAM  
20 VC-21 49 NCH-11 78 Phule -688 
21 SUVIN 50 T-7 79 Phule -717 
22 ACP-71 51 MCU-8 80 Phule 388  
23 PRATIMA  52 MCU-5VT 81 Phule-492 
24 JCC-1 53 SURABHI  82 Phule-622 
25 NCH-419 54 PKV RAJAT  83 NCS-954 
26 TCB-209 55 VC-32 84 Ajit-155 
27 MDH-89 56 RSP-4 85 Ajit-199 
28 SH-2379 57 KHANDWA -2   
29 AKH-081 58 F-846   
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR COTTON RESEARCH, REGIONAL STATION, 
NAGPUR  
The DUS testing trial for the Kharif 2021 was consist of five trials and variety maintenance at 
ICAR-CICR, Nagpur. The trials included New: 1st 
Year (6), second year (20), EDV (3), VCK (7) and 
additional sowing of 46 varieties for maintenance 
was also taken up. The sowing was at the normal 
date following the test guidelines. The germination 
and plant stand were satisfactory for all except two 
entries in VCK. All the characters as per the 
National test guideline, descriptors were recorded in 
the entries sown in three replications for both 
candidate and F1 SMG separately. The photos of traits have been captured and documented. The 
virtual monitoring of the trial was held on 16th November 2021. The fibre quality test results for 

Annual Report 2021 -22 46 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 the entries are awaited and once received the compiled data will be mailed to PI with a copy to 
the authority. The entries under maintenance breeding were observed for their major characters 
to ascertain purity and then selfed. Only selfed seeds are being carried forward for next season.  
The season witnessed continuous infestation of all types of insect pests and diseases, 
physiological wilting and leaf reddening due to erratic rainfall and due to heavy rainfall, overall 
growth of many entries was severely affected. Under EDV trial, the entry, 2873/2495 showed 
high number of off-types. But, F1 SMG plot was uniform with very a few numbers of off-types. 
Under VCK trial, one entry 2879/2346 showed poor germination for candidate plot, whereas, 
>80% germination for F1 SMG plot.  
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR COTTON RESEARCH, REGIONAL STATION, 
COIMBATORE  
Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2020-2021: At ICAR-Central Institute for 
Cotton Research, Regional Station, Coimbatore, as a nodal center for DUS testing, 
Distinctiveness Uniformity and Stability testing of cotton genotypes has been done under this 
project. In addition to ICAR-Central Institute for Cotton Research, Regional Station, 
Coimbatore, ICAR-Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur; National Seeds project Unit, 
UAS, Dharwad; Department of Cotton CCSHAU, Hisar; Regional Research Station Bhatinda, 
PAU and the Department of Cotton, MPKV, Rahuri are the co-nodal centers involved in 
conducting DUS trials. 
 
Field trials for the characterization and establishment of Distinctiveness, Uniformity and 
Stability was conducted with 8 hybrids in the first-year trial and 48 
candidate hybrids along with its corresponding hybrids produced 
at PPVFRA center at Shivamoga were accommodated in the 
second-year trial. Another three entries were for 2nd year trial. The 
Bt. Hybrids involved in both the trials as references were 17 
recommended for cultivation in central and south zone. Field 
sowing was taken up on 16.8.2021 in randomized block design 
with 3 replications. Germination count at 12 DAS in 
corresponding plot was recorded in all the entries. Morphological 
characters such as Hypocotyl: Pigmentationm, Leaf: Colour, Leaf: 
Hairiness, Leaf: Appearance, Leaf: Gossypol glands, Leaf: 
Nectaries, Leaf: Petiole pigmentation, Leaf: Shape, Plant: Stem 
hairiness, Plant: Stem pigmentation, Bract: Type, Flower: Time of 
flowering, Flower: Petal colour, Flower: Petal spot, Flower: Stigma, Flower: Anther Filament 
colouration , Flower: Polle n colour, Flower: Male Sterility, Boll: Bearing habit, Boll: Colour, 
Boll: Shape, Boll: Surface, Boll: Prominence of tip  were recorded in 10 plants of all varieties. 
The data received from participating centers would be compiled and submitted to PPVFRA for 

Annual Report 2021 -22 47 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 issue of registration certificate. Monitoring of DUS trials at the participating centers have also 
been done through online meetings on 16.11. 2021 at CICR, Nagpur and MPKV Rahuri; on 
29.12.2021 at CICR Coimbatore and on 20.1.2022 at UAS Dharwad.  
 
Crops New VC
K FV EDV IV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year entries   
Tetraploid 
cotton 8 96*+3=99   - - - 29.12.2021  
Diploid cotton  - - - - - -  
* 48+48 F1s produced at Shimoga were compared along with the candidate hybrid 
 
During the year 2021-22, the data base on extant cotton varieties and cotton varieties notified 
under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966 has been updated. Data sets of tetraploid and diploid 
cotton varieties registered under PPVFRAct, 2001 was acquired from PPVFRA, New Delhi. 
Maintenance breeding and characterization and of 126 extant cotton varieties and parental lines 
were carried out in tetraploid and Diploid cotton viz.,80 in G. hirsutum , 7 in G.barbadense , 36 in 
G. arboreum,  3 in G.herbaceum. 
 
Table 3.4: Following varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Crops Name or no of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2020 -2021 
Tetraploid 
cotton- 
G. hirsutum (80)  Arizona super okra, Anjali, American Nectariless, Acala glandless, 
Abadhitha, Badnawar, Bhaghya, Bikaneri Nerma, BN Frego, BN Red, CCH 
2623, Deviraj, DHY 286 -1, EC 344025, EC 344034, Extreme Okra, G Cot. 
12, G.Cot. 100, GLM 5, Gujarat 67, HC 122 -66, HLS 329, HS 6, J 34, 
Jalandar , JCC 1, JK 35, JLH 168, K 34007, Khanchana, KEKCHI red, 
Kemp, Khandwa 2, Khandwa 3, L 604, LAHH 5, Laxmi, LH 900, LRA 5166, 
LSS, Mahalakshmi, MCU 11, MCU 12, MCU 3, MCU 4, Rajat Bt, Rajat Bt, 
GJHV 372 Bt, GJHV 372 Bt, PKV 081 Bt, PKV 081 Bt, 2880/3220, P 
15(Var. flr.), NC 105, Vikram, Vagad Kalyan, TCH 1716, SVPR 5, S upriya, 
Suman, Sowbhagya, Sivanandi, Sahana, PRS 74, PRS 72, PKV Rajat, P 15 1, 
P 15 DP, P 15, NCH 11, NC 217, Narmada, N 1, Mysore Vijaya, MDH 89, 
MCU 9, MCU 8, MCU 7, MCU 5 VT, MCU 5  
Tetraploid 
cotton- 
G.barbadense 
(7) P 4, RHC 001, RSP 4, SB(YF) 425, S ujatha, Suvin, TCB 209   
Diploid cotton - 
G. arboreum 
(36) AKA 7, Aravinda, PA 255, PA 255, Raghavendra, Jayadhar, AK 235, AKA 
5, AKA 8, AKA 8401, Cat No.8405 -Brown fuzz, Dhumad, DLSa -17, DS 5, 
G.Cot. 15, G.Cot. 19, HD 107, HD 226, HD 432, HD110 -151, Jawa har tapti, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 48 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 JK5, JLA 794, K11, LD 210, LD 327, LD 491, LD 694, PA 183, PA 402, 
Phule Anmol, Phule Dhanwanrty, RG 18, RG 8, Veena, Y1  
Diploid cotton - 
G.herbaceum 
(3) DDhc 11, G.Cot. 23, G.Cot. 25  
 
CCS HISAR AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, HISAR 
Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22: 
During the year 2021-22 only 15 reference varieties were 
characterized as per DUS guidelines. Nineteen candidate 
hybrids and varieties along with 18 reference varieties were 
grown on 08.05.2022 for testing during 2022-23. Six rows of 
each entry were sown in two replications with row to row 
spacing of 90 cm and plant to plant of 60 cm. Plant population 
maintained as per the DUS Test guidelines. The observations 
will be recorded on plant, flower, boll, lint and seed characters along with fibre quality 
parameters.  
 
Crops New & VCK  
1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Cotton 15 (Reference varieties only)  19 + 18 (Reference varieties)  
 
Centre has also maintained/characterized 11 varieties/hybrids in triploid and 4 varieties/hybrid in 
diploid cotton. 
Crops Name or No of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
 11 varieties and hybrids: G. hirsutum  
4 varieties and hybrids: G. arboreum  
 
PAU REGIONAL STATION, BHATINDA 
PAU RRS Bathinda (DUS centre) has irrigated conditions with cotton sowing window April to 
mid-May. Due to covid incidences, seeds of entries were recd late from PPVFRA and therefore 
sowing was delayed till June 2021 due to which crop growth and vigor was not very satisfactory. 
DUS testing trial was conducted successfully and data was recorded, tabulated and submitted as 
per guidelines. Breeding lines/reference varieties were maintained with selfing.  
New VCK EDV Reference Varieties  Date of 
monitoring  
2876/2230/H  2874/2287/H  2873/2480/H  JCC 1, F 1861, MCU 10, 
RS 810, H 1157, Laxmi, 
Pratima 16/11/2021  
2871/2073/H  2870/2104/H  2873/2504/H  
2871/2100/H  2869/2385/H  2873/2470/H  

Annual Report 2021 -22 49 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2880/2324/H  2874/2285/H  2871/2072/H  J 34, ACP 71, NH 452, 
Sumangala, NH 545, 
Kanchana, F 2228 (ZC), JK 
4, Badnawar, LH 2298, 
Abadhita, GSHV 112  2871/2132/H  
2871/2128/H  
 
Table 3.5 : List Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Sl 
No. List of varieties under maintenance breeding in 
2021-22 Source, 
Release/commercial 
release date, if any  
1. LH 2298, F 2228  PAU Ludhiana  
2. H 1157, Sumangala, J 34, Pratima  
NH 452, NH 545, GSHV112, MCU 5, JK 4, 
Badnawar, Abadhita, JCC 1, CU 10, Laxmi, 
ACP 71, Kanchana  Received from CICR  
Regional Station, 
Coimbatore  
 
 
3.1.3.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR JUTE :  
 
ICAR-CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR JUTE AND ALLIED FIBERS, 
BARRACKPORE & CSRSJAF, BUD BUD BURDWAN, WB 
 
Two entries, one each from Corchorus olitorius and Corchorus 
capsularis was tested for 1st year growing cycle during 2021. In 
case of olitorius entries, one entry was found to be distinct with 
respect to seed colour. In case of capsularis  entries, one was 
different from other entries with respect to fibre strength. 
Overall crop growth was satisfactory. Reference collection of 
both Corchorus olitorius (30 varieties) and  Corchorus capsularis (21 varieties) have been 
maintained through plant to progeny row method. Database of reference collection has been 
prepared taking observations during the maintenance of reference collection.  
 
Salient details  Information on practice  
Date of receipt of se eds+ list 26.02.2021  
Date of planting  16.03.2021  
Details of fertilisers given (dose/per acre wise)  N:P:K @14:12:14 kg   
Details of pesticides/fungicides/others applied  Carbendazim for seed treatment and  
spraying in stem rot disease, 
Profenofos for caterpillars, 
Spiromesifen for yellow mite  

Annual Report 2021 -22 50 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Date of DUS Monitoring  23.8.2021  
Date of Harvesting  16.07.21 (for fibre) 23.11.21 (seed)  
List of Zonal/Regional check used in trial  JRO 204, JRC 517  
 
                  Table 3.6:  Status of candidate variety registration/Notified by the Centre: 
Crops No of Var 
notified by the 
center Since 1966  No of Var 
notified by the 
center Since 
1999 No of applications 
filed 
Extant 
Notified            
New    Certificates 
issued 
C. olitorius  18 14 11 7 9 
C. 
capsularis  11 9 7 5 9 
 
 
3.1.4.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR MAIZE:  
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MAIZE RESEARCH (ICAR-IIMR) 
The DUS testing was carried out successfully on total 53 candidate entries which include 42 
hybrids, 8 inbred lines and 3 farmer varieties. Out of 42 hybrids, 10 hybrids were under 
1stseason of testing and 16 hybrids were in the 2ndseason of testing along with their parental 
crosses which were re-constituted by crossing parents of the hybrids to test stability of the 
hybrids.  
 
Table 3.7: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22: 
 
Crops  
[Maize] New Total Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Hybrid Candidate  Candidate  F1 Shivamoga  42 21.09.2021  
10 16 16 
Inbred 07 01 08 
FV 03 - 03 
Total 20 33 53 
 
The entries of 2nd season were sown side- by-side along 
with their parental crosses for comparison. In addition, 7 
inbred lines were in 1st season of DUS testing, and 1 
inbred line was in 2ndseason of DUS testing. The DUS 
trial also includes 20 references, out of which 14 were 

Annual Report 2021 -22 51 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 hybrids and six were inbred lines.  
The overall plant stand, growth and expression of DUS trial were very good in all three 
replications. Heavy rains along with winds in the months of August caused flood like situations 
and severe lodging. However, timely intervention through lifting of plants and also earthing-up 
could save the trial. Data pertaining to DUS characters 1 to 17 have been recorded on standing 
crop and for the traits 18 to 31 was recorded on the harvested crop as per DUS guideline for all 
the entries. Maize DUS data of Hybrids and Inbred Lines for 1st and 2nd year entries were 
submitted on January 14, 2022. For the trials of entries in 2nd year, all 
the test entries except few for one or two traits were showing 
uniformity, the details of discrepancies or mismatch observed were 
submitted in the monitoring report. Most of F 1 SMG was matching with 
the original hybrid, however in some particular instances for few traits 
there were some discrepancies were observed which were pointed-out 
and submitted in the monitoring report.  
The farmers’ varieties were not uniform making it difficult for 
DUS characterization. However, DUS data was recorded based on the common characters in 
majority of plants with details on variation observed. Farmer’s Varieties, i.e., 2886/2211, 
2886/2212 and 2877/2761 tested in the first year showed variation in few traits like presence of 
pigmentation in brace root, silk, tassel structure and also relatively more variation in days to 
flowering. 
 
 
3.1.5.  SRTC, PROF. JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITY (PJTSAU), HYDERABAD 
 
During 2021-22, DUS testing trials of hybrids, inbred lines and farmer’s varieties were 
conducted as per the DUS test guidelines. The 
trials were conducted for 53 candidate entries 
comprising 26 hybrids, 16 parental crosses, 3 
farmer varieties and 8 inbred lines. Second year 
candidate hybrids were sown along with the 
parental crosses produced by PPVFRA at 
Shivamogga, Karnataka side- by-side for 
comparative DUS testing. The trial included 22 
references comprising 14 hybrids, 6 inbred lines, 
one zonal check hybrid and one local check hybrid. 
The overall plant stand, growth and expression of hybrids and inbred lines were satisfactory and 
data was recorded accurately and precisely. 
All the test hybrids were sown on 28.7.2021 while the inbred lines were sown on 
29.7.2021. A healthy crop was raised duly following all the recommended package of practices. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 52 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Overall plant stand, growth and expression of test entries were good in all the replications except 
one 1st year inbred candidate entry (Trial code-2886/2150) which failed to germinate . 
Except few, most of the entries have shown uniform expression. Variation within entry 
for some traits was observed in 2122H2 (1st year candidate hybrid), 2886/2211 (1st year FV), 
2886/2212 (1st year FV), 2877/2761 (1st year FV) and 2880/2817 (1st year candidate inbred). 
 
 
3.1.6.  VPKAS, ALMORA  
 
The centre is having a responsibility testing of Kidney 
bean (Rajma), Soybean and Maize DUS testing. In 
Kidney bean: Four varieties ( one new viz., 2884/2107 & 
3 FV viz., 2887/2075, 2887/2076 & 2887/2077) along 
with three reference varieties  viz., IPR 98-5, HUR 137 
and PDR 14 were raised and characterized for 22 DUS 
traits as per national guidelines for the conduct of test for 
DUS on kidney bean. 
 
Maintenance breeding 
Soybean:  
One hundred and seventeen 117 reference varieties of soybean and 14 varieties of kidney bean 
were raised for maintenance breeding during 
Kharif 2021. Measures were taken to ensure 
the genetic and physical purity of reference 
varieties at every stage of crop growth by 
observing varietal characteristics. The list of 
the varieties under maintenance is given 
below. 
 
 
Table 3.8 :Reference varieties under maintenance at ICAR-VPAKS, Almora 
 
Crop 
Species Source of 
Varieties  Name of the varieties  
Soybean ICAR DS 228, DS 97 -12,Pusa 16, Pusa 20, Pusa 22, Pusa 24, Pusa 37, Pusa 40, 
NRC 2, NRC 7, NRC 12, NRC 37  
Own VL Soya 1, VL Soya 2, VL Soya 21, VL Soya 47, VL Soya 59, VL Soya  
63,  VL Baht 201, VL Soya 77, VL Soya 65 and VL Soya 89  
Others (specify)  ADT1, Alankar, Ankur, Birsa Soya 1, Bragg, CO 1, CO 3, CO Soya 2, 
Durga, Gujrat Soya 1, Gujrat Soya 2, Gaurav, Hara Soya, Hardee, 
Improved Pelican, Indira Soya 9, JS 2, JS 71 -05, JS 75-46, JS 76-205, JS 
79-81, JS 80-21, JS 90-41, JS 93-05, JS 95-60, JS 97-52, JS 335, KB 79, 
KHSB 2, Kalitur, Lee, LSB 1, MACS 13, MACS 57, MACS 58, MACS 
124, MACS 450, MAUS 1, MAUS 2, MAUS 32, MAUS 47, MAUS 61, 

Annual Report 2021 -22 53 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 MAUS 61 -2, MAUS 71, MAUS 81, Monetta, Palam Soya, PK 262, PK 
308, PK 327, PK 471, PK 416, PK 472, PS 564, PS 1024, PS 1029, PS 
1042, PS 1092, PS 1241, PS 1347, PS1368, Punjab 1, RAUS 5, Shilajeet, 
Shivalik, SL 96, SL 295, SL 525, SL 688, TAMS 38, TAMS 98 and 
Type 49 
Rajmash ICAR IVFB 1, Arka Anoop,  Arka Komal, Suridha & PDR 14  
Own VL Rajma 63 and  VL Rajma 125  
 Others  HUR 15, HUR 137, HUR 203 and HUR 35  
 
 
 
3.1.7.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR BREAD WHEAT, DURUM AND OTHER 
TRITICUM SP.: 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF WHEAT AND BARLEY RESEARCH, KARNAL, 
HARYANA 
 
1. DUS testing in Wheat 
In crop season 2021-22, the seed of 25 entries were received from the Authority for DUS testing. 
These were tested against 37 reference varieties. 07 entries (GKRA-1, WBPRA-249, WLCM-
257, GBRB-1, GTRA-251, WRCB-421, WRCB- 420) were in 2nd year of DUS testing, while 11 
entries (21 N3, 21 N5, 21 N6, 21 N9, 2883/2404, 2883/2409, 2883/2420, 2883/2421, 2883/2424, 
2883/2447, 2883/2694 ) were in 1st year of DUS testing. These were tested in three replications 
against 37 reference varieties. The trial was sown as per the DUS testing guideline of wheat. The 
seed of 7 entries (21 N1*, 21 N2*, 21 N4*, 21 N7*, 21 N8*, 21 N10*, 21 N11*) was received in 
less quantity. So, the DUS test was conducted in three rows plot with three replications. 
Observations were recorded as per the prescribed guidelines in all the trial.  
 
  
Fig. 1: DUS trial in wheat during 2021-22                                   Fig.2: Coleoptile colour in wheat 

Annual Report 2021 -22 54 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
Fig.3: Phenol colouration in wheat 
                                                    
2. Stability testing in Wheat 
 
Stability in the DUS traits was also observed in 07 varieties (2nd year GoT). The harvested seed 
of the candidate varieties along with original seed received from authority was grown side by 
side during 2nd year of DUS testing. The observations on DUS character were recorded from 
both the plots for comparison. All the traits in 07 varieties were stable in 7 varieties. 
  
  
                                Fig. 4:  Stability in last year harvest seed and PPVFRA seed (1st year)  
3. Uniformity  testing in Wheat 
 
All the entries except 2 entries (2883/2420 & GBRB 1) exhibited uniformity in DUS testing. 
      
                                    Fig. 5:  Variation in plant length in two candidate entries  
Original seed  Harvest seed  Original 
seed  Harvest seed  
Annual Report 2021 -22 55 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 4. Maintenance of reference and example varieties of wheat 
 
In wheat, one kg seed of 123 example varieties beside 427 reference collection of released 
varieties are being maintained at IIWBR, Karnal. 
  
Fig. 6 :  maintained Reference and Example varieties 
 
5. Registration of varieties with the PP&VFRA  
Five wheat varieties namely DBW303, DDW48, MPO1255, DBW93 and MP3382 were 
registered under extant category by the PPVFRA, New Delhi vide registration number 
REG/2021/0076, REG/2021/0077, REG/2017/152, REG/2016/421 and REG/2016/1387, 
respectively. Three registration applications of wheat varieties namely DBW 296, DBW 327, 
DBW 332 were submitted to PPVFRA. 
 
ICAR-INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, REGIONAL 
STATION, INDORE, MADHYA PRADESH 
 
Details of DUS Testing of Candidate Varieties in 2021-22 
IARI, RS, Indore is the Co-Nodal center for Bread Wheat DUS Testing. Wheat Trials 
during 2021- 22 were sown as per the DUS Test Guidelines of PPVFRA.In crop season 2021-22, 
seven Candidate Varieties  (Table 3.10) are being tested against 37 Reference Varieties  under 
New/VCK Category in DUS Testing. In addition, 18 Farmers’ Varieties  after purification (1st 
year) are being tested in two replications.  
 
Table 3.9. Details of varieties in DUS trial at ICAR-IARI, Regional Station, Indore, Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Crops New VCK FV 
1st year entries  2nd year entries  1st year 
entries 2nd year 
entries 
Bread 
Wheat 21N1, 21N2, 
21N3, 21N4, WRCB420,  
WRCB421,  2883/2694, 
2883/2409, - 

Annual Report 2021 -22 56 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 21N5, 21N6, 
21N7, 21N8, 
21N9, 21N10, 
21N11,  GTRA251, 
GBRB1, 
WLCM257, 
WBPRA249, 
GKRA1 2883/2424, 
2883/2447, 
2883/2421, 
2883/2404, 
2883/2420  
 
Table 3.10. Details of seven Candidate Varieties  and 37 Reference Varieties in DUS trial at 
ICAR-IARI, Regional Station, Indore, Madhya Pradesh, as Second Year Entries.  
 
Candidate 
Varieties  Reference Varieties  
WRCB420  HD 2824 WH1080 DBW88 WH1105 NW1067 Ajanta 
WRCB421  PBW373 WH1124 HD2967 HW1085 MP3211 WH416 
GTRA251  HD2281 DBW17 PBW660 UP2554 HD2135  
GBR1 GW89 PBW502 Raj4037 HD2932 HS1138-6-4  
WLCM257  GW322 DPW621-50 GW496 HW2045 MLKS11   
WBPRA249  DBW110  MP(JW)4106  Ratan 
(CG5016)  NI5439 RW346  
GKRA1 Raj 4083 KRL210 HD3090 AKAW4627  TAWA267   
 
Figure 1-12. Snapshots of DUS trials during various phases of data recording, conducting and 
miscellaneous observations 
 
   
Figure 1. Layout of DUS Trial at 
ICAR-IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block  Figure 2. Sowing of DUS Trial 
at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block  Figure 3. DUS Trial at ICAR -
IARI RS Indore Experimental 
Block at Early Growth Stage  
   
Figure 4. Cross testing of 
coleotile colouration of wheat 
samples as per directives of 
PPVFRA  Figure 5. Field View of DUS 
Trial at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block at Early 
Growth Stage  Figure 6. Field View of DUS Trial 
at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block at Grand 
Growth Stage  

Annual Report 2021 -22 57 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
    
Figure 7. Extending working 
knowledge of PPVFRA about 
DUS Testing to the post 
graduate students of Gujarati 
Science College, Indore, 
Madhya Pradesh  Figure 8. Field View of DUS 
Trial at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block at 
Physiological Maturity Stage  Figure 9. Recording Observations 
of DUS Trial at ICAR -IARI RS 
Indore Experimental Block  
   
Figure 10. Field View of DUS 
Trial at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block at Maturity 
Stage Figure 11. Ha rvesting of DUS 
Trial at ICAR -IARI RS Indore 
Experimental Block in presence 
of Co-PI (DUS Wheat) project  Figure 12. Recording phenol 
colouration test of wheat grain 
sample as per directives of 
PPVFRA  
 
Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  130 reference collection of wheat varieties are 
being maintained at Referral Library  of ICAR-IARI, Regional Station, Indore. 
 
Crops  Name or No of varieties under maintenance  breeding in 2021 -22 
Wheat Released varieties aestivum-80 
Released varieties durum &dicoccum -50 
Total 130 
 
Summary : The plots were laid out as per PPVFRA guidelines. Candidate varieties were grown 
side by side to the reference varieties for comparison. The overall performance of the DUS trials 
was very good. Few of the candidate varieties have 1.5-3.5% mixture whereas the mixture 
percentage in farmer’s varieties was quite high. The claimed characteristics were found to be 
expressed throughout the trials.  The monitoring was conducted when the crop was in the soft 
dough stage by the Co-nodal Officer of the DUS Test at Indore, due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
Most of the candidate varieties of DUS trials expressed the claimed characteristics at the time of 
monitoring.Awareness about importance and knowhow including legality of the importance of 
PPVFRA, New Delhi was disseminated to the visiting farmers during the growth stages and 
students also. 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 58 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES, DHARWAD, KARNATAKA  
 
During 2021-22, none of the durum wheat candidates were there for evaluation, and 
hence, 68 reference varieties were characterized for DUS characters and maintained.  
Additional DUS characters which are most feasible for durum wheat namely,  Flag leaf: 
anthocyanin coloration of auricles, Flag leaf: hairs on auricle, presence of bristles, beak colour 
and awn colour (green stage) were recorded during 2021-22. These traits may be relooked in 
other centers to be proposed to include in DUS guidelines. Majority of the dicoccum wheat 
cultivating farmers have maintained local types and cultivating for consumption purpose. In this 
regard, fifteen Farmers’ Varieties including T. dicoccum  and T. aestivum  species collected from 
three different districts were evaluated and purified during previous rabi season 2020-21. During 
rabi 2021-22, these farmers varieties were evaluated as per DUS guidelines involving 45 
characters representing growth habit characters, ear head characters, grain characters, etc.  
The data generated will be utilized for registration of these Farmers’ Varieties which is 
under process.  
 
Table 3.11: Details for  Farmers' Varieties  
Sl. No Name of the applicant  Species  Local Name  
1 Roopa Chidambar Kulkarni, At: Dhavaleshwar, Tq: 
Mudalagi, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Kapali 
2 Dhareppa Parappa Kittur, At:Sasalatti, Tq: Rabakavi - 
Banahatti, Dist: Bagalkot  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
3 Mahadev Bheemappa Rangapur, At: Itnal, Tq: 
Raibag, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
4 Shivappa Basappa  Mugalkod, At: Mudalgi, Tq: 
Mudalgi, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
5 Smt. Suvarna Babu Kamate, At: Hirekodi, Tq: 
Chikkodi, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Kapali godi  
6 Kallappa Gurupad Yaladegi, At: Shegunshi, Tq: 
Athani, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
7 Prabhukar Shivaling Sollapure, At: Yaksamba 
(Kallol), Tq: Chikkodi, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Kapali 
8 Krishnappa Arjun Channal, At: Dhavaleshwar, Tq: 
Gokak, Dist: Belagavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
9 Baramgouda Hanumanthgouda Chikkangoudar, At: 
Bairanatti, Tq: Naragund, Dist: Gadag  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
10 Mr. Santhoshkumar Pujer, Gosabal, Tq Gokak, Dst: 
Belgaum-591229 Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
11 Praveen Pattar, At:Darur, Tq: Athani, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
Annual Report 2021 -22 59 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 12 Kallappa Mali, At: Hidkal, Tq: Raibag, Dist: Belgavi  Triticum 
dicoccum  Sadak 
13 Rudrappa Julpi, At: Huliyal, Tq: Jamakhandi, Dist: 
Bagalkot  Triticum 
aestivum Hulyal Julpi 
Godi (HZG 30)  
14 Rudrappa Julpi, At: Huliyal, Tq: Jamakhandi, Dist: 
Bagalkot  Triticum 
aestivum Hulyal Local -1 
15 Rudrappa Julpi, At: Huliyal, Tq: Jamakhandi, Dist: 
Bagalkot  Triticum 
aestivum Hulyal Local -2 
16 Rudrappa Julpi, At: Huliyal, Tq: Jamakhandi, Dist: 
Bagalkot  Triticum 
aestivum Hulyal Local -3 
 
 
3.1.8.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR SORGHUM:  
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MILLETS RESEARCH, RAJENDRANAGAR, 
HYDERABAD, TELANGANA  
 
1. No. of varieties for DUS testing 
Crops New VCK FV 
1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Kharif 2021 2 - - - 
Rabi 2021-22 - - - - 
 
2. No. of reference and example varieties maintained at the centre  
No. of reference and example varieties 
under maintenance breeding during 
2021-22 119 Sorghumvarieties (including parental lines - male 
sterile/maintainer/restorer, hybrids and OPVs)  
 
3. Summary of the DUS result (in only in one para) 
During the year under report, field trials were conducted during kharif 2021 and rabi 2021-22 
seasons for examining the DUS traits in candidate varieties and reference varieties of sorghum as 
per the PPVFRA test guidelines. Two candidate varieties were tested during kharif seasonunder 
1styear testing.The crop growth and expression of DUS traits were very good during the season. 
Data were enumerated as per revised DUS test guidelines and submitted to PPVFRA. All the 
kharif adapted example varieties wereplantedin a replicated trial for characterization. During rabi 
Annual Report 2021 -22 60 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2021-22maintenance breeding/characterization was undertaken for 119 reference varieties 
including parental lines of hybrids and open-pollinated varieties under enforced 
selfing/controlled pollination. 
4. Whether monitoring is done or not (date of monitoring and committee members) : No 
5.  Any other information– List of varieties under maintenance breeding 
Sl.No. Reference variety  Sl.No. Reference variety  Sl.No. Reference variety  
1 AKR 354 41 DJ 6514 81 PhuleMadhur  
2 AKR 73 42 GFS 4 82 PhuleMaulee  
3 AKSSV 22  43 GFS 5 83 Phule Panchami  
4 APK 1 44 GJ 9 84 PhuleRevathi  
5 BP 53 45 GJ 35 85 PhuleRohini  
6 BSR 1 46 GJ 36 86 PhuleVasudha  
7 C 43 47 GJ 37 87 PKV Kranti  
8 CB 11 48 GJ 38 88 PSB 3 
9 CB 33 49 GJ 39 89 PSB 9 
10 CO(S) 28 50 GJ 40 90 PSR 23 
11 CS 3541 51 HC 171 91 PSR 34 
12 CSV 7R 52 HC 260 92 PSV 1 
13 CSV 8R 53 HC 308 93 PSV 2 
14 CSV 10 54 HJ 513 94 PSV 56 
15 CSV 12R 55 Indore 12 95 PusaChari 23  
16 CSV 13 56 JJ 741 96 PVK 400 
17 CSV 14R 57 JJ 938 97 PVK 801 
18 CSV 15 58 K 8 98 PVR 453 
19 CSV 17 59 K 11 99 RS 29 
20 CSV 19SS  60 M 35-1 100 RS 627 
21 CSV 20 61 Mant 1 101 RS 647 
22 CSV 21F 62 MP Chari  102 RS 673 
23 CSV 23 63 MR 750 103 Selection 3  
24 CSV 24SS  64 NSV 13 104 SPSSV 30  
25 CSV 216R  65 N 15 105 SPV 1430  
26 CSV 27 66 NTJ 3 106 SPV 2018  
27 CSV 28 67 NTJ 5 107 SPV 462 
28 CSV 29R 68 PalamuruJonna  108 SSG 59-3 
29 CSV 33MF  69 Pant Chari 3  109 SSV 74 
30 CSV 34 70 Pant Chari 4 110 SSV 84 
31 CSV 36 71 Pant Chari 5  111 SU 1080 
32 CSV 37 72 Pant Chari 6  112 Surat 1 
33 CSV 39 73 Parbhani Dagadi  113 Swathi 
34 CSV 40F 74 Parbhani Moti(1411)  114 UP Chari 2  
35 CSV 41 75 Payur 2 115 463 A 
36 CSV 42 76 PDKV HurdaKartiki  116 463 B 
37 DSV 1 77 PDKV Kalyani  117 ICS 467 B  
38 DSV 4 78 PhuleAmrutha  118 CSH 14 (AKMS 14A x 
AKR 150)  
Annual Report 2021 -22 61 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 39 DSV 5 79 PhuleAnuradha  119 CSH 24MF (ICS 467A x 
Pant Chari 6)  
40 DSV 6 80 PhuleChitra    
 
5. Few selected important photographs 
Photographs of some DUS traits 
a. Leaf sheath: Anthocyanin pigmentation 
  
Absent ( 2886/2137/H ) Present(CSH 24 MF)  
  
b. Stigma: Yellow colouration                                 c. Flower with pedicel: Length of flower 
  
Present (2849/2023/H)  Absent 
(CSH 24 MF)  
 
d. Panicle: Density at maturity (ear head compactness) 
  
Semi loose 
(2886/2137/H)  Loose (CSH 24 MF)  
  
Long 
(2886/2137/H ) Medium (CSH 24 MF)  

Annual Report 2021 -22 62 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   Long (2849/2023/H ) Medium(CSH 24 MF)  
 
e. Grain:Texture of endosperm (in longitudinal section) 
  
¾ farinaceous 
(2849/2023/H)  Half vitreous (CSH 24 
MF) 
f. Grain: Colour of vitreous albumen 
  Greyed yellow 
(2849/2023/H)  Greyed orange (CSH 24 
MF) 
 
g. Grain: Size of mark of germ 
 
MAHATMA PHULE KRISHI VIDYAPEETH, RAHURI, AHMEDNAGAR, 
MAHARASHTRA 
 
I) Season: Kharif - 
Trial No I- Candidate varieties 02 along with 01 reference varieties. Trial No 2- 56 reference 
varieties. 
 
II) Season: Rabi - 
114 Reference varieties. 
 
2. Performance/Target  achieved:  
 
In the 1st trial 02 Candidate varieties along with 01 reference variety and 2nd trial 56 reference 
varieties tested during Kharif-2021 and 114 reference varieties were tested during rabi season in 
year 2021-22. The recorded datasheet of trial is submitted to the Nodal centre: Indian Indian 
Institute of Millet Research, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad. 
 
I) Season: Kharif - 

Annual Report 2021 -22 63 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Trial No 1- Candidate varieties 02 along with 01 reference varieties 
Trial No 2- 56 reference varieties . 
II) Season: Rabi - 
114 Reference varieties 
3. Financial performance/Target  fixed: 
 
As per the budget DUS Project on Sorghum at All India Co-ordinates Sorghum Improvement 
Project, MPKV, Rahuri has received following grants during financial year2021-22 
Table 3.12: Funds received during 2021- 22 
S. No. Particulars  Amount (Rs.)  
1 Allocated budget for F.Y. 2021 -22 6,75,000/ - 
2 Man Power: One IRF @ 31,000/ - + HRA 4,87,000/- 
3 Field expenses +  Contingency  1,63,000/- 
4 Travel 25,000/- 
Annexure-B Details of Manpower 
 
*Note- One IRF appointed from 12“‘ April 2022 (Mr. Ranjeet Anil Tambe ) 
4. Financial performance/Tar get achieved:  
 
DUS Project on Sorghum at Sorghum Improvement Project, MPKV, Rahuri had utilized the 
grants received during financial year 2021-22 as below 
Sr. No Budget head  Amount (Rs.)  
1. Salary 2,62,948/- 
2. T.A. 00/- 
3. Recurring contingency  1,63,000/- 
4. Balance 2,49,052/- 
 Total 6,75,000/- 
 
 Sr. No Post Number of Post  Amount (Rs.) 
1 *Junior Research Fellow  One @31,000/- + HRA 
Annual Report 2021 -22 64 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.9.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR PEARL MILLET 
 
BAJRA RESEARCH SCHEME, COLLAGE OF AGRICULTURE, DHULE, 
MAHARASHTRA  
Financial progress 
As per the budget DUS Project on Pearl Millet at ICAR-All India Co-ordinated Research Project 
on Pearl Millet, Bajra Research Scheme, College of Agriculture, Dhule has received following 
grants during financial year 2021-22 
1 Sanctioned budget during FY 2021 -22 6,82,800/ -- 
2 Fund released during FY 2021 -22 5,79,340 (Unspent from FY 2020 -21) 
+ 2,00,000 = 7,79,340/ - 
3 Amount utilized  5,25,412/ -- 
4 Unspent balance, if any  2,53,928/ -- 
5 Whether UC/work done report/SoE is 
submitted  Submitted  
 
Part B: Technical progress (Performance/Target achieved): 
The DUS testing of 21 candidate and one farmer’s varieties for first year and 04 candidate 
varieties and one farmer’s varieties for second year as per guidelines conducted successfully 
during kharif 2021 and data recorded. The stage wise photographs were also taken for candidate 
varieties. The recorded datasheet and stage wise photographs of Kharif 2021 trial is submitted to 
the Nodal center: P.C., Unit, ARS, Mandor, Jodhapur. 
1.  No. of entries tested for DUS in the last three years   
 2019:Ist Year-Candidate Varieties -06, Farmer varieties -12 
          IInd Year-Candidate Varieties -07, Farmer varieties -02 
2020:Ist Year-Candidate Varieties -08, Farmer varieties - 
          IInd Year-Candidate Varieties -03, Farmer varieties -02 
2021:Ist Year-Candidate Varieties-21, Farmer varieties - 01 
            IInd Year-Candidate Varieties -04, Farmer varieties -01 
2.  Whether results submitted along with replication -wise 10 
plants data and photographs representing distinct trait of 
candidate varieties  Submitted to Nodal 
Centre, PC Unit, 
Mandor, Jodhapur 
(Rajastan) for onward 
transmission to 
Registrar, PPVFRA  
No.ACD/BRS/data 
sheet/DUS/408/22 
dated 14/01/2022  If submitted, date of submission of softcopy to the 
Registrar/Joint Registrar  
3.  No. of reference varieties maintained at DUS centre  -- 
Whether replicated data of reference varieties submitted to the 
Authority Yes 
4.  Technical man -power engaged in the DUS project  01 JRF from 1/06/2021  
Annual Report 2021 -22 65 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 AGRICULTURE RESEARCH STATION, MANDORE, JODHPUR 
 
  Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
 
Crops New FV Date of 
monitoring  2nd year entries  1styear entries + Reference 
varieties  
Pearl Millet  04 21 02 - 
 
Table 3.18: List of varieties under DUS testing during 2021-22 
A. Second Year Test (New): 04 
 
S. No. Name of Variety S. No. Name of Variety  
1 2020 PM H1 - CH 3 2020 PM H2 - CH 
2 2020 PM H1 - SMGH 4 2020 PM H2 - SMGH 
B. First Year Test (New  + Reference): 21 
 
C. Farmers’ Varieties: 02 
S. No. Name of Variety  
1 FV 1 - 2879/2288  
2 FV 2 - 2886/2407  
 
b) Data submission of Kharif 2021-22: √ Yes/No (hard copy/soft copy √) 
Key observations of the Monitoring team (1-2 points max): 
 
c) Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 56 
 
Crops Name or No of varieties under  maintenance breeding in 2020 -21 
Pearl Millet  56 (List enclosed) updated data has been submitted for 2020 -2021 
 
Data submission (Maintenance Breeding): √ Yes/No S. No. Name of Variety  S. No. Name of Variety  S. No. Name of 
Variety 
1 2021 H1 8 2021 H9 15 2021 - 4 
2 2021 H2 9 2021 H10  16 2021 - 5 
3 2021 H3 10 2021 H11  17 2021 - 6 
4 2021 H4 11 2021 H12  18 2021 - 7 
5 2021 H5 12 2021 H13  19 2021 - 8 
6 2021 H6 13 2021 - C 20 2021 - 9 
7 2021 H7 14 2021 - 2 21 2021 - 10 
Annual Report 2021 -22 66 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 D: Reference/example varieties maintained: 
S.No. Reference/exam
ple varieties  S.No. Reference/exam
ple varieties  S.No. Reference/example 
varieties 
1 81 B 20 J 2454 39 RHB 173  
2 841 B 21 J 2467 40 MPMH 17  
3 842 B 22 ICMR 356  41 RHB 121  
4 843-22 B 23 H 77/833 -2-202 42 GHB 558  
5 ICMB 88004  24 G 73-107 43 GHB 744  
6 ICMB 92333  25 H 77/29-2 44 GHB 732  
7 ICMB 92777  26 H 77/833 -2 45 ICMH 356  
8 ICMB 93333  27 H 90/4-5 46 HHB 67 Improved  
9 ICMB 94555  28 HBL 11 47 HHB 197  
10 ICMB 94111  29 RHRBI 1314  48 HHB 223  
11 ICMB 95222  30 RIB 3135 -18 49 Pratap 
12 ICMB 97111  31 RIB 494 50 Nandi 61 
13 ICMB 97444  32 RIB 335/74  51 86M64 
14 ICMB 02333  33 PIB 686 52 Kaveri Super Boss  
15 ICMB 04999  34 MIR 525-2  53 86M86 
16 RHRB 1B  35 RHB 177  54 MP 7792 
17 RHRB 5B  36 GHB 538  55 JKBH 26  
18 RHRB 13B  37 GHB 719  56 Proagro 9444  
19 J 2340 38 PB 106   
5. Financial progress (copy of SoE and UC for FY 2021-22 are enclosed) (item details may 
be mentioned) 
 
Items Unspen
t 
balance 
as on 
1st 
April, 
2021 Interest 
accrued/ot
her income 
for the 
DUS 
centre Budget 
FY 
2021-22 Funds 
released 
in FY 
2021-22 Total 
fund 
available 
for 
expenditu
re 2021-
22 Expenditu
re in FY 
2021-22 Unspent 
balance 
as on 1st 
April 
2022 
Manpower  
(SRF/RA/T
A) 34825.
00 0.00 487000.
00 1215175.
00 1250000.
00 487200.0
0 525765.
00 
Non-
Recurring 0.00 0.00 0.0 
Recurring(fi
eld expenses 
and 
contingency)  0.00 237800.
00 237035.0
0 
Others (TA)  0.00 25000.0
0 0.00 
Annual Report 2021 -22 67 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Total 34825.
00 0.00 750000.
00 1215175.
00 1250000.
00 724235.0
0 525765.
00 
 
Table 3.13 : Financial requirement for 2022-23  
Items Funds required  Justification  
 Existing Position  
Technical manpower  
(indicate JRF/SRF/RA/TA and no 
of manpower required)  495600.00  SRF Salary @ Rs. 35000 +18% 
HRA(Rs. 41300 x 12 month)  
Field Expenses and Contingency  350000.00  Contingency amount for field research 
work 
T.A. 50000.00  T.A. for P.I./Technical Manpower  
Total 895600.00   
 
 
1. Training cum Awareness programme conducted, publications and other significant 
achievements, if any : 
Training cum Awareness programme was held at ICAR-AICRP on Pearl Millet at 
Jodhpur on 28th September 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.10.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR FINGER MILLET, FOXTAIL MILLET, 
BARNYARD MILLET, PROSO MILLET, LITTLE MILLET, KODO MILLET  
 
AICRIP ON SMALL MILLETS, UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES, 
GANDHI KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRA, BANGALORE  
Table 3.14:  Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Finger millet  7 -   - 

Annual Report 2021 -22 68 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Foxtail millet  2 -   - 
Kodo millet  1 -   - 
Barnyard millet  2 -   - 
Little millet  1 -   - 
 
Table 3.15:  Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Salient Achievements  
 
The testing entries in finger millet, foxtail millet, little millet, barnyard millet and Kodo millet 
were characterized in replicated trails for DUS traits along with reference varietal sets as per the 
DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPV and FRA. During the Kharif 2021, first year 
DUS characterization has been done for finger millet, foxtail millet,little millet, barnyard millet 
and Kodo millet lines.Trails were conducted in three replications and all entries were 
characterized for DUS traits along with reference varietal sets. 
 
Progress report 
During the Kharif 2021, first year DUS characterization has been done for Finger millet, Foxtail 
millet, little millet, barnyard millet and Kodo millet lines. Testing entries were evaluated in 
replicated trials were characterized for DUS traits along with reference varietal sets as per the 
DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPVFRA. The description of the progress report in 
different millets has been mentioned below. 
 
Finger millet 
DUS testing for finger millet has been conducted at DUS lead center, PC unit (Small millets), 
AICRP on Small Millets, Bengaluru and cooperative center Athiyandal, Tamilnadu during 
Kharif 2021. For Finger millet, a total of 7 testing entries in replicated trial and along with 77 Crops Name or No. of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -
2022 
Finger millet  77 
Foxtail millet  28 
Kodo millet  26 
Little millet  17 
Proso millet  12 
Barnyard millet  12 
Annual Report 2021 -22 69 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 reference varieties have been characterized as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for finger millet 
by PPVFRA. The DUS testing entries were sown 3 replications, four rows each of 3.0 m length 
withspacing of 22x10 cm.  
For finger millet, a total of 26 characters have considered for DUS characterization. For each 
character, the range of values were recorded in the coded form.Further, these 26 characters have 
been grouped in to 5 grouping characters as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for finger millet 
crop by PPVFRA. 
 
Foxtail millet 
DUS testing for Foxtail millet has been conducted in PC unit, Small millets, AICRP on Small 
Millets, Bengaluru and Athiyandal, Tamilnadu during Kharif2021. For Foxtail millet, a total of 2 
testing entries, along with 28 reference varieties have been considered for DUS characterization 
as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPVFRA. The DUS testing entries were 
sown in 3 replications, four rows each of 3.0 m length withspacing of 22x10 cm.  
For Foxtail millet, a total of 23 characters have been considered for DUS characterization. For 
each character, the ranges of values were recorded in the coded form. Further, these 23 
characters have been grouped in to 5 grouping characters as per the DUS guidelines prescribed 
for foxtail millet by PPVFRA.  
 
Kodo millet 
Kodo millet one test entry along with 26 reference varieties were tested in the field for DUS 
characterization during Kharif 2021.DUS characterization is carried out as per the DUS 
guidelines prescribed for Kodo millet by PPVFRA. According to DUS guidelines, a total of 30 
characters were recorded in Kodo millet for both DUS observation lines and reference variety 
set. For each character, the ranges of values were recorded in the coded form. 
 
Barnyard millet 
DUS testing for barnyard millet has been conducted in PC unit, Small millets, AICRP on Small 
Millets, Bengaluru and Athiyandal, Tamilnadu during Kharif 2021. For Foxtail millet, a total of 
two testing entry, along with 12 reference varieties have been considered for DUS 
characterization as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPVFRA. The DUS 
testing entries were sown in 3 replications, four rows each of 3.0 m length withspacing of 22x10 
cm.  
For barnyard millet, a total of 22 characters have been considered for DUS characterization. For 
each character, the ranges of values were recorded in the coded form. Further, these 23 
characters have been grouped in to 5 grouping characters as per the DUS guidelines prescribed 
for foxtail millet by PPVFRA.  
Little millet 
DUS testing for little millet has been conducted in PC unit, Small millets, AICRP on Small 
Millets, Bengaluru and Athiyandal, Tamilnadu during Kharif 2021. For Foxtail millet, a total of 
Annual Report 2021 -22 70 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 1 testing entry, along with 17 reference varieties have been considered for DUS characterization 
as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPVFRA. The DUS testing entries were 
sown in 3 replications, four rows each of 3.0 m length withspacing of 22x10 cm.  
For little millet, a total of 20 characters have been considered for DUS characterization. 
For each character, the ranges of values were recorded in the coded form. Further, these 23 
characters have been grouped in to 5 grouping characters as per the DUS guidelines prescribed 
for foxtail millet by PPVFRA. 
Table 3.16: New testing entries were received during Kharif-2022 
SL. No Crop Trial Code  
1 Finger Millet  22 K Ragi 1  
2 Finger Millet  22 K Ragi 2  
3 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F1  
4 Finger Millet 22 KhRa F2  
5 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F3  
6 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F4  
7 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F5  
8 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F6  
9 Finger Millet  22 Kh Ra F7  
10 Foxtail Millet  22 Kh FF1  
11 Foxtail Millet  22 Kh FF2  
 
Test entries of finger millet and foxtail millet will be evaluated during kharif-2022 with 
references sets as per the DUS guidelines prescribed for each crop by PPVFRA.The DUS testing 
entries were sown in 3 replications, four rows each of 3.0 m length withspacing of 22x10 cm. 
Representative images of test entries (Finger millet and Little millet) 
Finger millet (2886/2335)  Finger millet (2886/2336)  Finger millet (2887/2046)  
   

Annual Report 2021 -22 71 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Finger millet (2887/2047)  Finger millet (2880/3389)  Finger millet (2883/2663)  
  
   
Finger millet (2883/2680)   
 
 
Foxtail millet (2887/2048)  Barnyard millet (2886/2334)  Little millet (2886/2332)  
   

Annual Report 2021 -22 72 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Foxtail millet (2887/2050)  Barnyard millet (2887/2049)  Kodomillet (2887/2040 ) 
   
 
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE IN SMALL MILLETS, TAMIL NADU AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITY, ATHIYANDAL, TAMIL NADU  
1. Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops 1st year entries  2nd year entries  VCK FV Date of 
Monitoring  
1. Finger millet  7 
- 
 - - 
 - 
 2. Foxtail millet  2 
3. Kodo millet  1 
4. Little millet  1 
5. Barnyard 
millet 2 
 
5. Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Crops No. of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
Finger millet  77 reference varieties  
Foxtail millet  28 reference varieties  
Kodo millet  26 reference varieties  
Little millet  17 reference varieties  
Barnyard millet  12 reference varieties  
Proso  millet  12 reference varieties  
Browntop millet*  69 reference varieties  
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 73 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Progress during 2021-22 
Finger millet:  
Seven new first year DUS test entries 2880/3389, 2883/2663, 2883/2680, 2886/2335, 2886/2336, 
2887/2046 and 2887/2047, were characterized along with 77 reference materials were evaluated 
during kharif, 2021. The test entries were evaluated in four rows, each in 3m length in four 
replications with the spacing of 22.5 x 10 cm. Each reference entry was raised in two rows of 3m 
in length. In finger millet 26 characters were used for characterization.  
Foxtail millet: 
A total of two testing entries 2887/2048 and 2887/2050 along with 28 reference varieties have 
been characterized as per the DUS guidelines during kharif, 2021. All the test entries were 
evaluated in four rows, each in 3m length in four replications with the spacing of 22.5 x 10 cm. 
Each reference entry was raised in two rows, each in 3m length. In foxtail millet, 23 characters 
were used for DUS characterization. All the entries were uniform.  
Kodo millet: 
One test entry 2887/2040, of kodo millet along with 26 reference varieties were characterized 
during kharif, 2021 at Athiyandal, Tamil Nadu. The test entries were evaluated in four rows, 
each in 3m length in four replications with the spacing of 22.5 x 10 cm. Each reference entry was 
raised in two rows, each in 3m length. A total of 30 characters were recorded for DUS 
observation.  
Little millet: 
One test entry 2886/2332 in little millet along with 17 reference varieties were characterized 
during kharif, 2021 at Athiyandal, Tamil Nadu. A total of 20 characters were recorded for DUS 
observation. All the test entries were evaluated in four rows, each in 3m length in four 
replications with the spacing of 22.5 x 10 cm. Each reference entry was raised in two rows, each  
in 3m length. 
Barnyard millet : 
A total of two test entries 2886/2334 and 2887/2049, in barnyard millet along with 12 reference 
lines were evaluated at Athiyandal during kharif, 2021. The test entries were evaluated in four 
rows, each in 3m length in four replications with the spacing of 22.5 x 10 cm. Each reference 
entry was raised in two rows, each in 3m length. A total of 20 characters were recorded for DUS 
observation. 
Salient Achievements 
 All the seven finger millet varieties were uniform  
 Two foxtail millet entries and two barnyard millet entries were uniform.  
 Kodo millet and Little millet entry was also uniform 
Annual Report 2021 -22 74 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  The first year entries of seven number in finger millet 2880/3389, 2883/2663, 
2883/2680, 2886/2335, 2886/2336, 2887/2046 and 2887/2047, two number in foxtail 
millet 2887/2048 and 2887/2050, one number in Kodo millet 2887/2040, two number 
in Barnyard millet 2886/2334 and 2887/2049, and one in Little millet 2886/2332 were 
evaluated during kharif, 2021 The same entries will be evaluated for second year DUS 
testing during kharif, 2022 for validation.  
 
Finger millet 
      
 
 
 
 
Foxtail millet 
                                        
      
   Kodo millet                                                                   Little millet 
     
 
                   
 
     
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 75 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.11.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR CHICKPEA  
 
MAHATMA PHULE KRISHI VIDYAPEETH, RAHURI, AHMEDNAGAR, 
MAHARASHTRA  
 
I) Season: Rabi  2021-22 
 
 Total Varieties Tested: 22 (Farmer’s varieties: 02 + 20 Reference varieties were sown on 
10.11.2021 and tested during Rabi 2021-22. 
 
2. Performance/Target achieved: 
 
The DUS testing of 02 farmer’s varieties along with 20 reference varieties of chickpea 
was tested during Rabi 2021-22. The soft copy of recorded data of 02 farmer’s varieties along 
with 20 reference varieties of chickpea was submitted to PPV & FRA Authority and Nodal 
Center, Project Coordinator (Chickpea), IIPR, Kanpur on 20.05.2022 by email and  similarly 
same copy of data (hard copy) submitted by speed post  on 23.05.2022. 
 
3. Financial performance/Target fixed: 
As per the sanctioned budget this Project has received following grants during financial year 2021-
22 
Funds received during 2021-22 Annexure-A 
Sr.No Perticulars  Amount (Rs.)  
1 Allocated Budget for F.Y. 2021 -22 6,62,200/ - 
2. Man Power: One SRF @ 35,000/ - + HRA 4,53,600/ - 
3. Field expenses  + contingency  1,83,600/ - 
4. Travel 25,000/- 
 
Annexure-B Details of Manpower  
Sr.No Post Number of post  Amount (Rs.) 
1 *Senior Research Fellow  One @35,000/ - + HRA 
              *Note- One SRF appointed from 8th  April  2022 (Dr. Arvind Sanjay Totre) 
4. Financial performance/Target achieved: 
“DUS Testing of Chickpea” at Pulses Improvement Project, MPKV, Rahuri has utilized the 
grants as below received during financial year 2021-22.   
 
Sr. No Budget head  Amount (Rs.)  
1 Salary  2,85,740/ - 
2 T.A. - 
3. Recurring contingency  1,83,293/ - 
4. Balance 1,93,167/ - 
                                            Total 6,62,200/- 
Annual Report 2021 -22 76 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PULSES RESEARCH, KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH  
Two farmers chickpea varieties viz., (2880/4108 and 2881/4278) were tested for DUS  trait 
during 2021-22 (First Year). Observations were recorded on 20 DUS traits as per National 
Guidelines of DUS testing for chickpea. The farmers variety 2881/4278, had no anthocyanin on 
stem, first flower initiation at 7 nodes (high), was spreading type with medium green foliage, 
medium leaflet size, had compound leaves and single flowers per peduncle with no stripes on 
standard. It had medium peduncle length, short plant height, medium pod size, more than one 
seeds/pod and pea shaped seeds. Seed testa texture was rough with no seed ribbing and seed was 
desi type. Based on grouping traits, the Farmers Variety 2881/4278 is late flowering (89 Days of 
Flowering) with white flowers. It has very small orange colour seed of size 14.7g/100 seeds. 
Based on these grouping traits, reference varieties will be selected for DUS testing during next 
year. One Farmers variety 2880/4108 did not germinate. Besides, 185 reference varieties were 
maintained. 
 
Visit of Dr. S.R. Gadakh, Director of 
Research, MPKV, Rahuri  on 18 Jan. 2022  
 Visit of Mr. Pramod Lahale, Registrar. 
MPKV, Rahuri on 28 Feb. 2022  
 
 
 
Field View of Chickpea DUS trial Rabi 2021-22 at Pulses Improvement Project, MPKV, 
Rahuri 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 77 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Photographs 
   
FV 2880/4108  Field View  FV 2881/4278  
 
Table 3.18:Table of Characteristics is given below: 
 
Farmers 
Variety 
 Characteristics  States Note 
2881/4278  Stem: Anthocyanin Colouration  Absent 1 
Stem: Height at initiation of first flower  High 7 
Time of flowering (50% of the plants with at least one 
open flower)  Late 7 
Plant: Growth Habit  Spreading  7 
Plant: Colour of foliage  Medium Green  2 
Leflet: Size(length) (middle of the plant and middle of the 
leaf) Medium 5 
Leaf: Pattern  Compound  2 
Flower: Number per peduncle  Single 1 
Flower: Colour  White 1 
Flower: Stripes on standard  Absent 1 
Peduncle: Length  Medium 5 
Plant: Height  Short 3 
Pod: Size(length)  Medium 5 
Pod: Number of seeds  More than one  3 
Seed: Colour  Orange 5 
Seed: Size (weight of 100 seeds at 10% moisture content)  Very small  1 
Seed: Shape  Pea shaped  1 
Sees: Testa Texture  Rough 1 
Seed: Ribbing  Absent 1 
Seed: Type  Desi 1 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 78 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.12.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR PIGEONPEA  
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PULSES RESEARCH, KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH  
During Kharif 2021-22 seven farmers’ varieties (One in second year DUS Testing & six in first 
year DUS Testing) were sown on 5th July 2021 for DUS characterization along with the 
reference varieties at ICAR-IIPR, Kanpur. Observations were recorded on 21 DUS traits as per 
national Guide Lines of DUS testing for pigeon pea. These traits include Anthocyanin 
colouration of hypocotyls, Plant: Branching pattern, Time of flowering, Plant growth habit, Stem 
colour, Leaf shape, Leaf pubescence on lower surface of leaf, Flower colour, Streak pattern of 
the petal, Pod colour, Pod pubescence, Pod waxiness, Pod surface stickness, Pod waxiness, Pod 
constriction, Pod sixe, No. of seeds in pod, Plant height, Seed colour, Seed colour pattern, Seed 
shape and Seed size (100 seed weight). Results of the above mentioned candidate varieties were 
already reported as per format to PPVFRA. Besides this 86 reference varieties were maintained. 
A detailed list of candidate varieties and reference variety maintained under the DUS test 
pigeonpea project is given below. 
 
Farmers Varieties u nder DUS Test 2021 -22 
S.No. Farmer Varieties  Year of testing  
1 Urrahar 
(Reg/2018/543)  2nd  Year DUS Testing  
2 2877/2679  Ist Year DUS Testing  
3 2886/2139  Ist Year DUS Testing  
4 2879/3134  Ist Year DUS Testing  
5 2881/4249  Ist Year DUS Testing  
6 2881/4250  Ist Year DUS Testing  
7 2881/4277  Ist Year DUS Testing  
 
Reference Varieties Under Maintenance (2021 -22) 
1. Early  Duration  
Reference  varieties: 25 ICP 84031, AL 15, GT 100, ICPL 151, ICPL 87, PUSA 
ARHAR-16, PUSA 855, PUSA 2001, PUSA84, PUSA 
33, PUSA 991, PUSA 992, PARAS, PA 291, AL 2091, 
AL 1992, AL 201, MANAK, GT 101, CORG 9701, TAT 
10, VLA 1, PAU 881, UPAS 120, IPA 15 -06 
 
2. Medium Duration 
Reference varieties: 38 BDN 708 LRG 38, ICPL 85063, AK 101, TS 3, WRG 27, 
BRG 2, LRG 30, GS 1, WRG 53, GC 11 -39, JA 4, AKP 
1, JKM 7, CO 5, JKM 189, GT 1, TV 1, VIPULA, 
VAMBAN -2, PT 221, AK 022, WRP 1, T 15 -15, TJT 
501, C11, ICPL 332, TTV 7, CO 6, VBN 3, PRG 176, 
AASHA, MARUTHI, BSMR 853, BSMR 736, BDN 2, 
GNP 2, AGT -2 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 79 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3. Long Duration 
Reference varieties: 25 IPA 15-2, IPA 206, IPA 203, NDA 1, BAHAR, NDA 2, 
MAL 13, PUSA 9, AMAR, MA 6, AZAD, T7, DA11, 
MA 3, IPA 8F, IPA 9 F, IPA 15F, IPA 16F, KPL 43, KPL 
44, IPA 2012 -1, KUDRAT -3, Errama Chachakamti, 
DHOLI, RAJENDRA ARHAR -1,  
 
 
 
 
 
Field Photograph (DUS Test 2021-22) 
 
2886/2139 (First year DUS Test) 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 80 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
Pigeon Pea and Safflower 
 
DR. PANJABRAO DESHMUKH KRISHI VIDYAPEETH, AKOLA,  MAHARASHTRA 
 
A) Maintenance of pigeon pea varieties under DUS programme.  
No. of varieties : 95 Nos. 
(Late: 26, Medium: 44, Early: 25) 
 
B) Characterization of Pigeon pea varieties under DUS programme.  
 i) First Year Testing 
List of Varieties 
Sr. No Registration no. of Candidate varieties  
01 2886/2139  
02 2879/3143  
03 2881/4249  
04 2881/4250  
05 2881/4277  
06 2877/2679  
 
C) Purification of farmer’s varieties under DUS programme.  
 
Sr. No. Name of Crop  List of varieties  
1. Pigeon pea  1.  Gajab-5 
2.  Renuka-25 

Annual Report 2021 -22 81 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
         3.   Samrudhhi -22 
2. Chickpea 1.    Kharbada chana  
3. Sorghum 1. Lilia Jodhala harawa  
2. Lilia Jodhala jalan  
3. Ramkee  
4. Ringni 
5. Umarkhedi  
 
 
TESTING OF SAFFLOWER VARIETIES UNDER DUS PROGRAMME. 
 
A. Maintenance of Safflower varieties under DUS programme.  
No. of varieties : 23 Nos. 
 
 
Field View: - Maintenance of Reference Varieties  of Pigeon pea at Dr. PDKV., 
Akola ( Kharif 2021-22) 
 
Early- 25               Medium - 44                    Late - 26          
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 82 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Field View: - First Year Testing, Kharif  2021-22 
Characterization of Pigeon pea Farmer’s varieties –(06 Nos.-Replicated trial) 
 
 
 
Field View: - Maintenance of Reference varieties of Safflower Rabi 2021 -22 at Dr. PDKV., 
Akola (23  Nos.)  
 
 
 
 
3.1.13.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR LENTIL, MUNG BEAN, URD BEAN, RAJMASH 
AND PEA: 
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PULSES RESEARCH, KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH  
Details for DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  

Annual Report 2021 -22 83 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Crop New VCK FV TOTAL 
Candidate 
varieties Date of 
monito
ring 1st Year 2nd Year 
1st Year 2nd Year 
Mungbean  - - - 4 - 4  
Urdbean - 1 - 1 - 2  
Lentil - - - - - -  
Field pea - - 2 4 - 6  
Rajmash - 1 - 4 - 5  
 
Report on Mungbean, Urdbean, Pea, Lentil and Rajmash(2021-22)  
 
 During Kharif season ( 2021) total 70 varieties of Mungbean and 41 varieties of Urdbean 
were maintained. Similarly, in Rabi season (2021-22) 61 varieties of pea, 39 varieties of 
Lentil and 14 varieties of Rajmash were maintained. 
 For maintenance of these varieties 10 single plants were selected from each variety and 
harvested individually.   
 In Kharif season (2021) only one new variety  of urdbeanwasreceived and tested along with 
reference varieties & data   recorded as per DUS guideline.  Likewise,four farmers’ varieties 
of mung bean and one farmer’s variety of urdbean tested for first year along with reference 
varieties & data   recorded as per DUS guideline.  
  In Rabi season (2021-22) two VCK varieties of peaevaluated in second year withreference 
varieties & data recorded as per DUS guideline. Likewise one new variety  of rajmash tested 
in second year along with reference varieties & data recorded as per DUS guideline. On 
similar note, four farmer’s varieties of each pea and rajmash were tested in first year along 
with reference varieties & data recorded as per DUS guideline.  
 In urdbean one farmer variety i.e. 2886/2054 evaluated in first year showed susceptible 
reaction towards the MYMV. 
 In urdbean one new variety i.e. 2883/2129 tested in second year which demonstrated 
susceptible reaction to MYMV.  
 In case of pea both theVCK varieties of pea (2FP1, 20FP2) were vegetable type. 
 Rajmash two farmers’ varietieswere spreading type in growth habit. 
 
Key observations of the monitoring team:  
Annual Report 2021 -22 84 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 5. Varieties under maintenance breeding 2021-22. 
S.No. Crop Species  Name of the varieties  
1. Green gram  
[Vignaradiata (L.) 
Wilczek] Total Number of reference varieties : 70  
JM 721, TARM 1, PANT M -5, SML-32, OUM 11 -
5,PUSA BAISAKHI,ML -818,LGG-407, GM -3,TARM-2, 
PANT-M-2,  GM -4, BM-2002-1,PUSA 9072, ML -
131,GANGA -8,PUSA-9531,BPMR -145, VAMBAN -
1,IPM-2-3, BM-2003-2,  MH -2-15, PANT -M-5, CO-
6,TMB-37,ML-613,BM-4,LGG-450,ML-267,IPM-2-
14,PUSA-VISHAL,ML -5,HUM-1,TARM-18, SML -134, 
NDM-1, PUSA -RATNA, SML -668,BM-2003-1, PDM-
139, OBGG -52, SUJATA, SHALIMAR -M-1, KM-
2,ASHA, PRATAP, RMG -62, RMG-344, RMG -268, IPM-
99-125, HUM -12, PUSA -0672, PKVAKM -4, PANT M -1, 
MH-96-1, PAIRY M OONG,  MUM -2, SONA MUNG, 
BDN-2, PDM-54, PS-16, DHOULI, T -44, AKM 8803, 
CO-4, GANGA -1, HUM -6,IPM 205 -7,IPM-410-
3,KOPERGAON  
2. Black gram  
 [Vignamungo (L.) 
Hepper] 
 Total Number of reference varieties : 41  
 
TAU-1,VAMBAN -7,TBG-104,LBG-685,PANT -U-
30,BARABANKI LOCAL, PANT -U-19, LBG-709, NDU -
1, IPU-2-43, KUG -479, LBG -645, LBG -787, NUL -7, 
SHEKHAR -3, LBG-752, TPU -4, TU-96-2, LBG-623, 
IPU-94-1, BDU-1, PANT -U-40, LBG -20, MASH -1-1, 
PANT-U-31, TBG- 123, INDIRA, NAVEEN, SHEKHAR -
1, KU-96-7, AZAD -2, HIM-MASH-1, SHEKHAR -2, UG-
338, AZAD -1, MASH -144,GU-1,SARLA,WBU -
108,PDU-1,T-9 
3. Lentil ( Lens 
culinaris) Total Number of reference varieties   39  
DPL-62, DPL-15, IPL-81, IPL-315, IPL-406, NDL -1,  PL 
-4,  PL-5, PL-24, PL-63, PL-234, PL-406, PL-639, PL-77-
12, L-4076, LL -56, LL-147, LL-699, L-4147, LH -84-8, 
VL-1, VL-4, VL-103, VL-126, VL-507, WBL -77, JL-1, 
JL-3, K-75, KLS -218, HUL -57, ASHA, RANJAN, 
SUBRITA, BARABHIA  LOCAL (RUST SES.), S.SI.5, 
IPL-316,PL-7,PL-8. 
4. Pea (Pisumsativum ) 
 
 Total Number of reference varieties 61  
 ARKEL, AZAD P -1, AZAD P -2, AZAD P -3, AZAD P -4, 
AZAD P-5, AZAD P -31, AGETA -6, DDR-23, DDR-27, 
VRP-3, VRP-5, VRP-6, VRP-7, VRP-22, KPMR -9, DDR-
44, HUDP -15, HFP-4, HFP-529, HFP -8909, IPFD -99-13, 
IPFD-1-10, IPFD-6-3, JAYANTI, KPMR -144-1, KPMR -
400, KPMR -522, IFP-48, PG-3,PANT P -14, SWATI, VL -
3,HFP 715,PANT 25,RFPG 79, INDIRA MATAR 1, B -
22, DMR-7, HUP-2, IM-9101, IPF -99-25,  IPF-4-9, IPF-5-
19,  IPF -4-26,  JM-6, JP-885, KFP -103, PANT  P -5, 
RACHNA, TRCP -8, VL-1, VL-42, VL-45, VL-46, PANT 
P 42, HFP -9426,HFP - 9907B ,IM9102,PANT P74,SKNP 
04-9. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 85 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 5. Rajmash ( phaseolus 
vulgaris) Total Number of reference varieties  14  
HUR-15, ARKA KOMAL, PDR -14, IPR -98-5, 
SHRIDHA, ARKA ANOOP, IPR -98-3-1HUR-137, IVFB -
1, HUR -203, ARKA BOLD, HPR -35, GUJRAT 
RAJMASH , Amber  
 
 
7. Financial progress ( pls also carry a copy of UC and SOE  upto01.04.2021  to 31.03.2022) 
 
S. N. Items Unspent 
balance 
carried 
forward 
from 
previous 
year Grant 
received 
from 
(1.4.2021 
to       
31.03.202
2 Other 
receipts/I
nterest 
earned, if 
any on 
the grants Total of 
Col. 
(2+3+4) Expenditur
e from 
1.4.2021 to       
31.03.2022  Balance 
(5-6) Re-marks 
 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 
1. Non-Recurring   
3794.00 0 0  
1212200 0  0 
2. Recurring  12,08,406 0  501345.00  0 
 (i)Research 
expenses  0 493500 0 
 (ii)Operational 
experiment  0 195387 0 
 (iii)T.A. 0 21968 0 
 (iv)Misc. 0 0 0 
 Total 3794.00 12,08,406  0 1212200.
00 710855.00  501345.00                                             0 
 
8. Training cum awareness programme conducted, publication and other significant 
achievements, if any: NA 
 
9. Application field with PPVFRA (applicable only for 57 notified crop species. Other files 
column 2 and 3, if applicable)  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 86 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Crops  No of 
variety 
notified 
by the 
center 
since  
1966 No of 
variety 
notified 
by the 
center 
since  
1999 No of applications field  Certific
ates 
issued Pending 
applicati
ons  Reason for 
pendency  
Extant 
Notified NEW  VCK 
Mungbean  120 41 33 2 - 18 17  
Urdbean 82 29 14 2 - 8 8  
Lentil  43 17 12 1 - 6 7  
Rajmash 6 3 4 1 - 2 3  
Pea  44 25 18 3 - 10 11  
Lathyrus 3 2 - - - - -  
 
                               
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 87 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
3.1.14.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR TOMATO, BRINJAL, OKRA, BOTTLE 
GOURD, PUMPKIN: 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, HESSARGHATTA 
LAKE POST, BENGALURU, KARNATAKA 
 
Table 3.19: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22, if any: 
 
Crops Candidate/New Varieties  VC
K Referenc
e 
Varieties  Date of 
monitorin
g 1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Hybrid Typica
l FV Candidat
e Hybrid F1 Hybrid 
SMG 
Tomato 2 - 1 19 19 - 7 09-02-
2022 
Brinjal  - - 11 - - - 7 09-02-
2022 
Okra 08 03 05 09 09 - 03 20-12-
2021 
Cucumber  - - - - - - - - 
Bitter 
Gourd - - - - - - - - 
Bottle 
Gourd - - - - - - - - 
Pumpkin - - - - - - - - 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 88 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 DUS Testing: Tomato  
 
A total of  41 tomato new/candidate varieties  and 7 reference varieties and have been raised for 
conduct of DUS Test for 47 morphological characters as per DUS test guidelines for the year 
2021-22. All the entries were characterized for DUS traits and monitoring of the DUS entries 
was conducted successfully under the chairmanship of Dr. A.T Sadashiva, Former Head, 
Division of Vegetable Crops, and IIHR Bengaluru on 09.02.2022 .  
Monitoring photos:  
 
   
Key observations of the Monitoring team (1-2 points max):  
 DUS plots were well maintained and all DUS trails were systematically recorded 
 It is suggested that seeds of reference varieties/hybrids may be supplied for comparison.  
Brinjal: A total of  11 brinjal farmers varieties and 7 reference varieties and have been raised for 
conduct of DUS Test for 47 morphological characters as per DUS test guidelines for the year 
2021-22.   
 
Monitoring photos:  
 
DUS Testing: Okra 
Twenty nine  (29) Okra new/candidate varieties, 5 Farmer Varieties  and 3 reference varieties were 
raised for conduct of DUS testing during the year 2021-22. Monitoring of the DUS entries was 
conducted successfully under the chairmanship of Dr. O.P Dutta, Crop expert and former Head, 
Division of Vegetable Crops, and ICAR- IIHR Bengaluru on 20.12.2021.   
 
Monitoring photos:  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 89 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Cucumber: we have not received any candidate varieties during 2021-22. 12 Reference varieties 
were selfing and maintaining for further utilization. Maintenance: 16 Reference varieties of 
Okra and 12 reference varieties of Cucumber were raised and selfed seeds were collected for 
further utilization.                                  
Maintenance of Bitter gourd Reference varieties:  Sixteen Bitter gourd reference varieties  
namely, Pusa Vishesh,  Pusa Do-Mausami, Sel.5,   MC-84,  Sel.1, Arka Harit, Hirkani,  Phule 
Green Gold,  Phule Ujwala, Meghana-2,  Preethi, NDBT-9,  Kalyanpur, Baramashi, NDBT-7,  
HABG-1,  Co-1 were maintained. 
Bottle gourd:  25 bottle gourd reference varieties were raised for DUS testing during the year 
2021-22 and characterized for 31 morphological traits as per the crop specific DUS test 
guidelines.  
 
Pumpkin: Four reference varieties (Arka Chandan, Kashi Harit, CO-2 and Pusa Vishwas) have 
been raised for conduct of DUS Test for 32 morphological characters as per DUS test guidelines 
for the year 2021-22.  
 
 
3.1.15.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR AMARANTHUS, PALAK, RIDGE GOURD   
 
ICAR- INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PUSA, NEW DELHI 
 
 No. of varieties for DUS testing  
Under DUS Cucurbits following four vegetable crop were tested. 
A. Ridge gourd -4  
(RG21H1, RG21H2, RG21H3 and RG21H4) all were candidate varieties. 
No. of reference & example varieties maintained at the centre  
 
A. Ridge gourd –  9 
(Pusa Nasdar, Pusa Nutan, Arka Sumeet, Jaipur Long, Phule Sucheta, Arka Sujat,           
Co-1, Deephti and GARG-1) 
 
B. Amaranth – 19 
(Arka Samraksha, Arka Suguma, Arka Verma, Canara Local, Pusa Lal Chaulai, Arun, Pusa 
Kiran, Arka Arunima, Krishna Sree, Rene Sree, Co-2,Co-3, Co-4, Co-5, IIHR-109-1, IIHR 
109-4, IC-551606, IC551608 and  RNA-1) 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 90 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 C. Palak-5 
(Arka Anupama, Pusa All Green, Pusa Bharti, Co-1, and HS-23)   
Experimental details 
 
Ridge gourd 
The Ridge gourd trial was laid out as per the DUS testing guidelines. The varieties were 
evaluated in RBD design with 3 replications with 20 plants in each replication. No of   Rows 
4, Row length 4.2m, Row- to-Row distance 3.0 m, Plant to Plant distance 60 cm. 
 
Amaranth 
The Amaranth trial was laid out as per the DUS testing guidelines. The varieties were 
evaluated in RBD design with three replications and observations were recorded from 20 
plants in each replication. No of   Rows 4, Row length 3m, Row to Row distance 50cm, Plant 
to Plant distance 20 cm. 
 
Palak 
The Palak trial was laid out as per the DUS testing guidelines. The varieties were evaluated in 
RBD design with three replications and observations were recorded from 20 plants in each 
replication. No of   Rows 5, Row length 2m, Row- to-Row distance 50cm, Plant to Plant 
distance 20cm. 
Few selected important photographes 
    
RG21H1  RG21H2  RG21H3  RG21H4  
Fig 1: photographs representing the characteristics of fruit of ridge gourd genotypes.  

Annual Report 2021 -22 91 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 Fig2: Photograph of amaranth and palak maintenance block 
 
 
CENTRE FOR DUS TESTING ON AMARANTH, CENTRE FOR CROP 
IMPROVEMENT, S. D. AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, SARDARKRUSHINAGAR, 
GUJARAT 
 
1. Financial Progress  2021-22 
 
Items Allocated 
Budget for FY 
2021-22 
 Fund 
released in 
FY 2021-22 
(Rs. Lakhs)  Expenditure in 
FY 2021-22 Unspent 
balance as on 
1st April 2022  
Manpower (Young 
professional II @ 
35,000/-) 6,45,000/ - 4,20,000/ - 91,451/- 3,28,549/ - 
Field expenses and 
contingency  2,00,000/ - 32,980/- 1,67,020/ - 
Travel Allowance  25,000/- - 25,000/- 
Total 6,45,000/ - 6,45,000/ - 1,24,431/ - 5,20,569/ - 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 92 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
2. Field Report, 2021-22  
  
 We have been evaluated below listed 10 varieties of Grain Amaranth under the 
Guidelines for the conduct of tests for Distinctiveness, Uniformity and Stability 
Grain Amaranth ( Amaranthus  L. excluding ornamental or vegetable varieties) 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Authority Government of India.  
 
1. Gujarat Amaranth 1 (GA 1)  6. Gujarat Amaranth 6 (GA 6)  
2. Gujarat Amaranth 2 (GA 2)  7. RMA 7  
3. Gujarat Amaranth 3 (GA 3) 8. Suverna  
4. Gujarat Amaranth 4 (GA 4)  9. BGA 2  
5. Gujarat Amaranth 5 (GA 5)  10. Annapurna  
 Total 18 morphological characters were studied. Out of 10 entries, five entries (GA 2, 
GA 3, GA 5, Suvarna and BGA 2)exhibited anthocyanin coloration at seedling 
hypocotyls. On the basis of inflorescence colour, fiveclass were observed i.e. green(GA 
1, GA 6, RMA 7 and Annapurna), yellowish green (Suvarna and BGA 2), purple (GA 2 
& GA 5), Pink (GA 3) and Mottling (GA 4). Two type of leaf blade main colour was 
obsearved i.e. Green (GA 1, GA 4, GA 6, RMA 7, Suvarna, BGA 2 and Annapurna) and 
Purple (GA 2, GA 3 and GA 5).All entries classify as early mature. The taken varieties 
have short (GA 3, Suvarna, BGA 2 and Annapurna) to medium (GA 1, GA 2, GA 4, GA 
5, GA 6 and RMA 7) plant height.  The seed volume was found ranged from 6.71 to 7.51 
g/10 ml. All entries expressed ridge type of stem surface and creamishcoloured seed. 
 
 Plate no. I and II showed the variation in inflorescence colour and anthocyanin 
pigmentation of grain amaranth entries. 
 
 
 
     
Green Purple Pink Mottling Purple 

Annual Report 2021 -22 93 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
    
Green Green Yellowish 
green Yellowish 
green Green 
Plate I: Inflorescence colour Grain amaranth entries.  
 
    
Absent  Present Present Present Absent 
 
    
Absent Present Present Absent  
 
Plate II: Seedling anthocyanin coloration of hypocotyl of Grain amaranth entries.  
 
3.1.15  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR BARLEY:  
 
ICAR-Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, Karnal, Haryana 
 
A total of 06 farmer’s varieties of barley were tested against 18 reference varieties as per DUS 
trial during 2021-22. This includes one farmer variety 2881/3965 for revalidation in grow-out 
test while 05 farmer’s varieties were grown for characterization in grow-out test during the 
season.  
Crops New VCK FV 
 1st year 
entries 2nd year 
entries 1st year entries  2nd year entries  

Annual Report 2021 -22 94 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Barley - - 2881/3965  20Bar1 
    BDPJ238  
    BRDJ287  
    BSLM262  
    BBPC286  
 
Reference and example varieties maintained at IIWBR: A set of 105 barley reference 
varieties were maintained for validation of 32 DUS characters. 
 
Summary of DUS Result: A total of 06 barley farmers varieties were tested under DUS trial 
during 2021-22 including one farmer variety, 2881/3965 is in grow-out test for characterization 
and recording of grouping characters. 105 reference varieties were also grown for validation of 
32 DUS characters . All the data of the trial was recorded for morphological and metric traits as 
per DUS barley guidelines. Data was compiled, analyzed and ready for submission to the PPVFR 
Authority. Further, the proposal of barley variety, DWRB 187 in extent categories was submitted 
to the PPVFRA, New Delhi for seeking protection under PPVFRA, 2001. 
 
Training programme attended by PI & Co-PI:  
 
1. Online training on DUS testing on June 30th, 2021 
2. Exchange on Biochemical and Molecular Techniques (BMT) guidelines and 
implementation of BMT in DUS” from December 16-17th, 2021 
3. Prospects of varieties/crops developed through Genome Editing (regulatory framework, 
technologies and experience on 24th May 2022 
4. Study visit consultation meeting & training on DUS testing on Wheat & Barley at 
Germany from 20-24 June, 2022  
Barley DUS trial photographs, 2021-22 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 95 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
RAJASTHAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, DURGAPUR (SRI KARAN 
NARENDRA AGRICULTURE UNIVERSITY, JOBNER) 
 
During Rabi 2021-22, for evaluation work three trials were framed i.e. DUS Trial, DUS 
Trial – 1 and DUS Trial – 2. In DUS Trial, Eighteen references varieties and six candidate 
v
arieties (5 for second year DUS testing and 1 for 1st year DUS testing) were planted with three 
replications and evaluated for different qualitative as well as quantitative traits decided.  In DUS 
Trial – 1, forty nine reference varieties and in DUS Trial – 2 one hundred five release varieties 
w
ere planted in two rows each of 4 meter. All DUS Trials data recorded done for all the thirty 
two characters/traits mandatory including both the qualitative as well as quantitative traits, for 
the project DUS on barley. 
 
Crops New VCK FV 
 1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries 1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Barley - - 2881/3965  20Bar1 
    BDPJ238  
    BRDJ287  
    BSLM262  
    BBPC286  

Annual Report 2021 -22 96 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Observations were recorded on randomly selected ten plants for each variety and their 
values were averaged. Data recording for characters 1-26 was done in standing crop in the field 
while for grain characteristic (27-32) observations were made after harvesting as per the 
prescribed guidelines. 
The crop growth and expression of morphological characters were good in all the entries. 
Observations on DUS characters on all the characters were recorded as per the prescribed 
guidelines. All the farmer’s varieties were showing uniformity. 
The crop growth and expression of morphological characters were good in all the entries.. 
All the farmer’s varieties were showing uniformity. Apart from this, stability in the DUS traits 
was also observed and all the traits in varieties were stable. 
We also maintained the seeds of one hundred five barley release varieties. 
All the data so recorded were submitted to Dr. Charan Singh, Nodal Officer, DUS Barley 
Project, IIWBR, Karnal.  
 
 
                            
 
 
 
Flag leaf attitude –  Semi erect (5)              Stem: Basal pigmentation – Present (9)  
                          
 
 
 
  
 
Upper node pigmentation –  Present (9)                            Auricle(flag leaf):Anthocyanin                                   
             Pigmentation – Absent (1) 

Annual Report 2021 -22 97 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.16.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR CABBAGE AND CAULIFLOWER 
 
 
ICAR- INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PUSA, NEW DELHI 
 
 
1. a) Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22, if any: (indicate no only) 
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year entries  2nd year  
entries  
1 Cabbage  01 (Cabbage 2881)  - - Yes 30.12.2021  
2 Cauliflower  01 (Cauliflower 
2883/2687)  - - Yes 30.12.2021  
 
 
b) Key observations of the Monitoring team (1-2 points, max):   
- Trials are done in proper design and as per experimental requirement.  
 
- New traits to be added for revision of guidelines to finalized.  
 
 
c) Varieties under maintenance/characterised: 
 
Mandated 
Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2017 -18 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Cabbage 01 (PusaAgeti)  Yes 
Cauliflower  07 :Pusa Meghna, Pusa Deepali, Pusa Sharad, Pusa 
Ashwini, PusaKartiki, PusaPaushja, PusaShukti  Yes 
 
d) Salient Achievements (1 paragraph only): 
 
One new entry each in cabbage (2881) and cauliflower (2883/2687) supplied by PPVFRA 
were tested along with four (4) reference & example varieties/ hybrids for first year. In 
total, 28 DUS characteristics, including four grouping characters were recorded from all 
these entries. The trial was monitored on 30-12 -2021 and the evaluation sheets and trial 
data will be submitted soon to PPVFRA. 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 98 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Cauliflower trial field view 
 
Cauliflower trial monitoring (30.12.2021) 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 99 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Cauliflower trial monitoring (30.12.2021) 
Cabbage trial monitoring (30.12.2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 100 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Financial progress (pls also send a copy of AUC & SOE for FY 2021-22)  
 
Items Unspent 
balance 
as on 1st 
April, 
2021 Interest 
accrued/other 
income for 
the DUS 
centre Budget 
FY 
2021-
22 Funds 
released 
in FY 
2021-22 Expenditure 
in FY 2021 -
22 Unspent 
balance 
as on 1st 
April 
2022 
Manpower  
(indicate 
SRF/JRF/RA/TA 
etc and no of 
technical 
manpower 
engaged in each 
category)      
  
Non Recurring      
Recurring(field 
expenses and 
contingency)      
Others     
Total 71608   538392 592469 17531 
 
Cabbage trial field view  
Annual Report 2021 -22 101 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 6. Training cum Awareness programme conducted, publications and other significant 
achievements, if any:  
Nil 
 
7. Applications filed with PPVFRA(applicable only for 172 notified crop species. Others file 
Column 2 and 3, if applicable) 
 
Crops No of 
Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
1966 No of Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
1999 No of 
applications 
filed 
 
 
Extant 
Notified  New   
VCK Certif
icates 
issued Pending 
application
s Reasons 
for 
pendenc
y 
Cabbage  01    Yes   
Cauliflower   02    Yes   
 
 
ICAR- INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KATRAIN, KULLU, 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 
 
1. No. of variety undergone maintenance breeding / characterisation / progress of 
development of DUS guidelines, if applicable (as the case maybe) 
 
Name of the species  No of varieties  Source(own released/ICAR/SAU)  
Cabbage 20 Own/ICAR/SAU  
Cauliflower (snowball group)  14 Own/ICAR/SAU  
 
2. No. of varieties undergone DUS testing in FY 2021-22 
 
Crops New VCK FV EDV         
IV 
(if any) Total Monitoring 
done on Chairman 
1st  yr 2nd 
yr   
Cabbage  -  - 2881/4255  
   1 - - 
Total -  - 1   1 
 
Under each category of New and VCK, pls mention, private or public sector var: 
Annual Report 2021 -22 102 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Brief observations during monitoring:  
 
a) Text in brief and supported by pictures and photographs                                     
 
4. Technical Progress:  
i) Cabbage : DUS testing of one candidate variety of cabbage viz., 2881/4255 in first year has 
been done with reference varieties viz., Golden Acre, Pusa Hybrid 81, Pride of India, Pusa 
Mukta and Pusa Drum Head as per DUS guidelines. Besides this 16 notified varieties viz., 
Golden Acre, Pusa Mukta, Pusa Drum Head, 83-1, 6A, C-121, Pride of India, Pride of Asia , 
Pusa Ageti,, 208A, 208 B, C-122, Kinner Red, KTCB-R3A, KTCB-R3B, KTCB-R5 and 4 
hybrids viz., Pusa Cabbage-1 (KGMR-1),  Pusa Red Cabbage Hybrid-1, Pusa Hybrid-81,  
Pusa Hybrid-82 have been characterized, purified and suitably maintained.  
  
              
                      Candidate Variety of cabbage: 2881/4255  
 
                 
      
Pusa Hybrid 81             Golden Acre                            Pride of India 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 103 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
       
Pusa Mukta   Pusa Drum Head  
 
             Cauliflower : Characterization, purification and maintenance of 11 varieties viz., Pusa 
Snowball-1, Pusa Snowball K-1, Pusa Himjyoti, Snowball-16, Pusa Snowball K-25, SK-1, Sel-
27, KTDH-53-1, 33A-1,  Kt-22 and Pusa Purple Cauliflower-1 along with 3 hybrids of snowball 
cauliflower namely Pusa Snowball Hybrid-1, Pusa Snowball Hybrid-2, Pusa Hybrid-301 were 
taken up. However, no candidate varieties/ entries of cauliflower were received for DUS testing.   
   
5. Financial progress with UCs/SoEs 
Unspent 
Balance       
2020-21 Budget FY   
2021-22 Funds 
Released FY 
2021-22 Expenditure 
up to 31-03-
2022 Unspent 
Balance as on 
01-04-2022 
3,593 4,40,000 4,36,407 95,957 3,44,043 
 
 
3.1.17.  DUS CENTRES FOR ONION AND GARLIC 
 
ICAR-DIRECTORATE OF ONION AND GARLIC RESEARCH, PUNE, 
MAHARASHTRA  
 
1. DUS Testing and Varieties under Maintenance  
 
a. Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22, if any: (indicate no only): Nil  
 
Note: None of the entry received for DUS testing but one multiplier onion Denomination Hari 
Onion-1 (REG/2014/1961) received on 29th Nov 2021 which is under multiplication and 
maintenance breeding. 
b. Key observations of the Monitoring team (1-2 points, max): NA 
 
c. Varieties under maintenance/ characterized: 

Annual Report 2021 -22 104 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Mandated 
Crop Species  Name or No. of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2021-22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Onion We are maintaining 52rabi and 10 kharif varieties 
of common onion  Yes 
Garlic We are maintaining 29 varieties of garlic  Yes 
Multiplier onion  We are maintaining 2 varieties of multiplier onion  Yes 
 
d. Salient Achievements (1 paragraph only) 
 
ICAR-DOGR is working as Nodal Centre for conduct of DUS test of onion and garlic and 
maintaining 62 onion and 29 garlic varieties under this project. These varieties of onion and 
garlic are treated as reference varieties. In onion, 52 rabi season varieties and 10 kharif season 
varieties and in garlic 29 varieties are being maintained at ICAR-DOGR, Rajgurunagar, Pune. 
Long day onion and garlic varieties are being maintained at ICAR-CITH, Srinagar and multiplier 
onion varieties at TNAU, Coimbatore. All the data have been recorded as per DUS test guideline 
in all the maintained varieties of onion and garlic under DUS project. Two onion farmers’ 
varieties i.e.Sona-40 and Sandip Pyaz planted for field screening test for genetic purity and 
uniformity and one multiplier onion ‘Hari Onion-1’ for multiplication and maintenance breeding.  
2. Financial progress (pls. also send a copy of AUC & SOE for FY 2021-22)  
 
S. 
No. Head-wise items  Sanctioned  
Budget Release Utilization  Unspent balance  
(as on 1st April 
2022) 
1 Man power 
SRF-1 @35000/ - + 
HRA  4,87,000/- 7,00,000/- 
(-1,67,271/- as 
opening balance 
on 1st April, 
2021) 4,37,410/- 1,68,570/- 
2 Field Expenses and 
Contingency  1,88,000/-  94,020/- 
3 TA 25,000/- 0/-  
 Others - - - - 
 Total 7,00,000/- 7,00,000/- 5,31,430/- 1,68,570/- 
 
3. Training cum Awareness programme conducted, publications and other significant achievements, 
if any: Nil 
 
4. Applications filed with PPVFRA (applicable only for 172 notified crop species. Others file 
Column 2 and 3, if applicable) 
Crops No of Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since No of 
Var 
notified 
by the 
center No of applications filed  
 Certificates 
issued Pending 
applicati
ons Reasons 
for 
pendency Extant 
Notified   New VCK 
Annual Report 2021 -22 105 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 1966 
(ICAR-
DOGR) Since 
1999 
(ICAR-
DOGR) 
Onion 10 10 9 1 - 9 1 Re-
submissio
n under 
progress Garlic  2 2 1 - - 1 1 
 
Three extant onion varieties (Bhima Shakti, Bhima Dark Red and Bhima Super) have been 
registered with PPVFRA, New Delhi for its protection. Six onion varieties (Bhima Kiran, Bhima 
Red, Bhima Raj,  Bhima Light Red, Bhima Shubhra and Bhima Safed as well as one garlic 
variety Bhima Omkar have been already registered with PPVFRA. One onion variety Bhima 
Shweta and one garlic variety Bhima Purple are under registration with PPVFR A. 
 
Crop Variety Category  Source   Reg. No.  
Onion Bhima Raj (B -780-5-2-2) Extant DOGR, Pune  262 of 2015  
Bhima Kiran (DOGR -597) Extant DOGR, Pune  341 of 2016  
Bhima Red (B -780-5-3-1) Extant DOGR, Pune  342 of 2016  
Bhima Safed  Extant DOGR, Pune  115 of 2019  
Bhima Shubhra  Extant DOGR, Pune  120 of 2019  
Bhima Light Red  Extant DOGR, Pune  261 of 2020  
Bhima Shakti  Extant DOGR, Pune  REG/2014/984  
Bhima Dark Red  New DOGR, Pune  REG/2014/985  
Bhima Super  Extant DOGR, Pune  REG/2015/2018  
Garlic Bhima Omkar (AC -200) Extant DOGR, Pune 427 of 2016  
 
Few selected important photographs:  
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 106 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
Maintenance of onion and garlic varieties under DUS Project  
 
   
3.1.18.  DUS CENTRES FOR CHILLI, BELL PEPPER AND PAPRIKA  
 
UNIVERSITY OF HORTICULTURAL SCIENCES, BAGALKOT, KARNATAKA 
 
1. a)Varieties under maintenance/characterised: 
 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No. of varieties under maintenance breeding in 
2021-22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Chilli 
(Capsicum 
annuum L.) 2021 H-3, 2021 H -4, 2021 H -5, 2021 H -6, 2021 H -7, 2021 
H-10, 2021 H-11, 2021 H -12, 2021 H -13,  2021 H -14, 
2021 IV-1,    2021 IV -7, 2021 IV -8, 2021 IV -19, 2021 IV -
20, 2021 IV -21, 2021 IV -22, 2021 IV -23, 2887/2051, 
2887/2053, 2880/3555  
Rudra, Shuka, Hy -80, GCS-94/68 and Arka lohit.  No 
Paprika 
(Capsicum 
annuum L.) BDE-1, BDE-2, BDE-3, BDE-4, BDE-5, BDE-6, BDE-7,    
BDE-8, BDE-9, BDE-10, BDE-11, BDE-12, BDE-13, 
BDE-14, BDE-15, BDE-16 and BDE -17 Yes 
Bell Pepper 
(Capsicum 
annum L. var. 
grossum) Apoorva  
 
 
b) Salient Achievements :  
 
1. All the collected genotypes (21) were characterized as per the DUS guidelines. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 107 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2. Maintained in the field in three replications 
3. At peak flowering  stage of the crop new invasive pest incidence was very serious so, 
performance and expression of the lines not up to level. 
4. In Horticultural Research and Extension Centre, Devihosur, Haveri 17 Byadgi Dabbi 
segments (Indian Paprika) have collected, evaluated and maintained.  
 
2Financial progress(pls also send a copy of AUC & SOE for FY 2021-22)  
 
Items Unspent 
balance 
as on 1st 
April, 
2021 Interest 
accrued/other 
income for 
the DUS 
centre Budget 
FY 
2021-
22 Funds 
released 
in FY 
2021-
22 Expenditure 
in FY 
2021-22 Unspent 
balance 
as on 1st 
April 
2022 
Manpower  
(indicate 
SRF/JRF/RA/TA 
etc and no of 
technical 
manpower 
engaged in each 
category)   
215750  
 
 
 
500000 21949 193801 
Non Recurring   284250 263561 20689 
Recurring(field 
expenses and 
contingency)   
   
Others     
Total    500000 285510 214490 
 
2. Training cum Awareness programme conducted, publications and other significant achievements, 
if any:   -NA - 
 
 
3. Applications filed with PPVFRA (applicable only for 172 notified crop species. Others file 
Column 2 and 3, if applicable) 
 
Crops No of Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
1966 No of Var 
notified by 
the center 
Since 1999  No of applications 
filed 
 
 
Extant 
Notified  New   VCK  Certificate
s issued Pending 
applicatio
ns Reasons 
for 
pendency 
- - - - 2 - - - - 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 108 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 General View of Experimental Block 
 
 
 
 
2. Leaf: Shape 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
17a  Lanceolate                             17b Broad elliptic 

Annual Report 2021 -22 109 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3 Stem: Shape 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
4 Anthocyanin coloration of nodes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Flower: Petal colour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11a Round  11b. Angled  
Green Purple 
21a Yellowish green  White  
21b White  
Annual Report 2021 -22 110 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 1. Flower: Anther Colour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Fruit: Shape at base 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calyx: Cover  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22a Pale blue  
41a Round  41b Acute  
46a Enveloping  46b Non-enveloping  
Annual Report 2021 -22 111 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.  Fruit: Curvature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Fruit: Sinuation of pericarp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31a Present  31b Absent  
35a Weak  35b Strong  
Annual Report 2021 -22 112 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.19.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR WATERMELON AND MUSKMELON 
 
ICAR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF ARID HORTICULTURE, BIKANER, RAJASTHAN   
Received the seed of watermelon viz., WM 20-1 F 1 SMG Hybrid, WM 20-1 Candidate 
Hybrid, WM 20-2 F 1 SMG Hybrid, WM 20-2 Candidate Hybrid for DUS testing and the trial 
was laid down in February, 2022. In muskmelon, MM 22 H 1 Hybrid, MM 22 H 2 Hybrid, MM 22 
H3 Hybrid, MM 22 H 4 Hybrid has been received and sown in the month of February, 2022 for 
DUS testing. Under typical category, the seed of 22 MM-1, 22 MM-2, 22 MM-3 of muskmelon 
has been supplied by PPVFRA, New Delhi for DUS testing. 
 
  
Seed traits of DUS test entries of watermelon  
 
 
Varieties under maintenance/ characterized 
During the summer season of 2021, maintained the seed of following reference varieties 
of watermelon and muskmelon to utilize in DUS testing. 
 
Crops Varieties undergone maintenance breeding during summer 2021  
Watermelon  
{Citrullus lanatus 
(Thunb.) Mansf.}  Sugar Baby, Durgapura Kesar, Arka Manik , AHW-19, AHW -65 and 
Thar Manak.  
Muskmelon  
(Cucumis melo L.) Arka Jeet, MHY -3, MHY-5, RM-43, RM-50, Durgapura Madhu , Kashi 
Madhu, Pusa Madhuras, GMM -3, Punjab Sunehri and Hara Madhu . 
 
Supplied the seed of reference varieties of watermelon (AHW-19, Thar Manak and RW 
187-2) and muskmelon (Arka Jeet) to the PPVFRA, New Delhi to utilize in DUS testing. 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, HESSARGHATTA 
LAKE POST, BENGALURU, KARNATAKA 
 
Maintenance and regeneration of reference varieties 

Annual Report 2021 -22 113 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 A total of ten reference varieties in watermelon and 12 reference varieties in muskmelon 
have been maintained and regenerated during Summer, 2021-22.  
 
Watermelon: 
 
 DUS testing of one entry of watermelon (Candidate hybrid-WM 20-2) and Shimoga 
hybrid (WM 20-2 F 1 SMG) along with ten reference varieties were carried out recently. 
The crop was sown on 28th Feb 2022.  
 The 10 reference varieties include Arka Manik, Sugar Baby, AHW-19, AHW-65, 
Crimson Sweet, Durgapur L al, Durgapur kesar,  Asahi Yamato , Thar manak, Arka 
Muthu  
 Data was recorded on 27 characters. 
 
Muskmelon: 
 Muskmelon three typical (22 MM-1, 22 MM-2. 22 MM-3) and four hybrids (MM 22 H1, 
MM 22 H2, MM 22 H3, MM 22 H4) were raised along with five reference varieties for 
conduct of DUS testing during the year 2021-22. The crop was sown on 9th March 2022. 
 Data was recorded on 34 characters. 
Monitoring of the Watermelon and Muskmelon trial were conducted on 15th June 2022 in Block-IV of 
ICAR-IIHR, Bengaluru under the chairmanship of Dr. O.P. Dutta.  The monitoring committee 
recommends that “DUS guidelines of descriptors need modification and revision urgently. The states for 
some characters may be made more elaborate to bring in clarity”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Field view of Watermelon DUS plot  Field view of Muskmelon DUS plot  
Annual Report 2021 -22 114 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
  
Monitoring team at Watermelon and Muskmelon DUS monitoring field at ICAR -IIHR, Hesaraghatta, 
Bengaluru  
FRUIT SHAPE, RIND PATTERN, FLESH COLOUR OF  
WATERMELON - WM20-2, WM 20 -2F1, ARKA MANIK, SUGAR BABY  
FRUIT SHAPE, RIND PATTERN, FLESH COLOUR OF MUSKMELON - MM 
22 H1, MM 22 H2, MM 22 H3, MM 22 H4 - (FOUR HYBRIDS)  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 115 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.20.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR POINTED GOURD  
 
BIDHAN CHANDRA KRISHI VISWAVIDYALAYA, KALYANI, WEST BENGAL 
 
Thirty five local clones/varieties of common knowledge of pointed gourd were planted during 
the 2nd week of November, 2020 in 15-20 cm raised bed that were 6.0 m long and 1.5 m width, 
accommodating twelve plants per plot following Randomized Block Design with three 
replications. The crop was harvested up to middle of October, 2021. Again 35 local 
clones/varieties of common knowledge were planted during the 2nd week of November, 2021.  
The traits described in the table of characteristics were used for the testing of candidate/reference 
varieties for DUS. 
 
FRUIT SHAPE, RIND PATTERN, FLESH COLOUR OF MUSKMELON - 22 MM-1, 22 MM -
2, 22 MM -3 – (THREE TYPICAL)  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 116 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 6a) Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Sl No Name or No of varieties* under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Source, 
Release/commercial 
release date, if any  Maintenance 
Breeding data 
compilation and sent 
to PPVFRA  
1.  BCPG-1*, BCPG -3*, BCPG -4*, 
BCPG-5*,  BCPG -6*, BCPG -14, 
BCPG-16*, BCPG -17*,BCPG -22, 
BCPG-23, BCPG -24, BCPG -25*, 
BCPG-26*,  BCPG -27*, BCPG -29,  
BCPG-30*, BCPG -31, BCPG -32, 
BCPG-33, BCPG -34, BCPG -35, 
BCPG-36*, BCPG -37*, BCPG -38  BCKV, West Bengal  Data of prev ious 
season (2020 -21) sent 
to PPVFRA.  
Present crop is in 
reproductive stage and 
complete data will be 
sent to PPV FRA after 
the end of the 
cropping season 
(November, 2022)  2. Swarna Alaukik*, Swarna Rekha*  ICAR Regional 
Institute for eastern 
India, Ranchi  
3. BAUPG-1, BAUPG -2, BAUPG -3, 
BAUPG-4 Bihar Agricultural 
university, Sabour  
4. Narendra Parwal -260*, NP -520 NDUAT, Faizabad  
5. Rajendra Parwal -1, Rajendra 
Parwal-2 Rajendra Prasad 
Central Agricultural 
University, 
Samastipur  
6. Kashi Suphal*, Kashi Alankar*  
 ICAR-IIVR, 
Varanasi 
7. Tripura Local  College of 
Agricultural 
Sciences, Tripura  
        
 *Identified as reference entries in DUS characterization , other entries designated as   
clonal selection from landraces are also being maintained.   
 
4. The following characteristics were used for grouping of pointed gourd cultivars/ varieties 
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 117 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
Sl. 
No.  Plant parts  Characteristics  Reference entries/Varieties  
a. Leaf: Shape  Auriculate  
Cordate BCPG-4, Kashi Suphal  
BCPG-1, Kashi Amulya*  
b.  Fruit: Shape  Club  
Cylindrical  
Oval 
Spindle  
Elongated spindle 
Ovate  
Spheroid  
Spindle tapering  BCPG-27  
BCPG-6, VRPG-126*  
BCPG-1, VRPG-103*  
BCPG-36  
BCPG-30, VRPG -173*  
BCPG-3  
VRPG-219*  
Narendra Parwal -260, Kashi 
Alankar  
c.  Fruit: Skin primary 
colour  Light Green  
Green  
Dark green  Swarna Alaukik, Kashi Alankar  
Kashi Amulya*, Kashi Suphal  
VRPG-219*, VRPG -221*  
d.  Fruit: Surface colour 
pattern  Uniform  
Mottled  
Striped Swarna Alaukik, VRPG -141*  
Kashi Amulya, Swarna Rekha  
VRPG-219*, VRPG -221*  
e.  Fruit: Length  Small (<5 cm), 
Medium (5 -10 cm), 
Long (> 10 cm)  VRPG-219*, VRPG -103*  
Kashi Amulya*, Kashi Alankar  
Narendra Parwal -260  
 
*  These reference entries are being maintained by ICAR-IIVR 
 
 
Other activities 
 
a) Training cum Awareness programme on PPVFRA conducted, if any:  Farmers across the 
state of West Bengal, Tripura and Odisha visited our field. Scientists attached with this 
project imparted training to the farmers regarding planting system, crop management, 
pollination management and insect-pests and disease management. An awareness 
programme on registration of Farmers variety to PPV & FRA was conducted.  
 
b) Publications and other significant achievements on PPVFRA, if any:  The guidelines of 
DUS testing of pointed gourd have recently been published with the active cooperation 
and support from PPV & FRA, ICAR-IIVR, Varanasi 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 118 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Distinguishing Photos of few important Reference varieties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uniform Striped Mottled 
Variability in fruit surface color pattern  
Variability in fruit shape  Club shaped  Spindle Spindle tapering  
Annual Report 2021 -22 119 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
Field view of pointed gourd DUS characterization at BCKV, Kalyani, West Bengal 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF VEGETABLE RESEARCH, VARANASI, UTTAR PRADESH 
 
Reference varieties under maintenance and characterized: 
 
The reference varieties of pointed gourd were collected from different ICAR institute and SAUs are 
being maintained at IIVR. Varanasi. Sixteen pointed gourd varieties/germplasm were maintained at 
ICAR-IIVR, Varanasi (Table 3.20). Data was recorded for 26 morphological characters (Table 3.21). 
 
Table 3.20: Reference varieties of pointed gourd is under maintenance at ICAR-IIVR, Varanasi 
S.N. Varieties  S.N. Varieties  
1. KashiAlankar  9. VRPG-219 
Pointed 
Annual Report 2021 -22 120 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2. KashiSuphal  10. VRPG-141 
3. KashiAmulya  11. VRPG-176-1 
4. VRPG-220 12. VRPG-105 
5. VRPG-221 13. SwarnaAlaukik  
6. VRPG-103 14. SwarnaRekha  
7. VRPG-126 15. BCPG-1 
8. VRPG-173 16. BCPG-3 
 
4. Technical Progress: 
 
 16 reference varieties of pointed gourd are being maintained and characterized. 
 
Table 3.21: Characterization of 16 reference varieties of pointed gourd at ICAR-IIVR for 
various DUS characteristic during 2021-22 ( A) 
 
Reference 
varieties  Stem: 
Shape Leaf:  
Shape Leaf:  
Margin Stem:  
Number 
of 
secondary 
branches 
up 
to 20 
th node Stem: 
Node 
number 
at which 
1st female 
flower 
appears 
on the 
main vine 
(indicates 
earliness)  Stem: 
Intensity of  
Pubescence  Leaf 
blade: 
Length 
(cm) Leaf 
blade: 
Width 
(cm) Leaf blade 
size: 
Length/width 
ratio (cm)  
KashiAlankar  Angular Auriculate  Undulate 9 10 Sparse  Long  Medium  Large 
KashiSuphal  Angular Auriculate  Undulate 9 12 Sparse  Long  Medium  Large 
KashiAmulya  Angular Cordate Undulate 5 10 Sparse  Long  Narrow Medium 
VRPG-220 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 10 12 Sparse  Long  Narrow Medium 
VRPG-221 Angular Auriculate  Lobed 12 11 Sparse  Long  Medium  Medium 
VRPG-103 Angular Cordate Undulate 13 13 Sparse  Long  Medium  Medium 
VRPG-126 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 13 13 Sparse  Medium  Medium  Medium 
VRPG-173 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 11 11 Sparse  Medium  Narrow Medium 
VRPG-219 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 12 11 Sparse  Medium  Medium Medium 
VRPG-141 Angular Cordate Undulate 12 14 Sparse  Medium  Narrow Medium 
VRPG-176-1 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 11 14 Sparse  Medium  Medium  Medium 
VRPG-105 Angular Cordate Undulate 14 13 Sparse  Medium  Medium  Medium 
SwarnaAlaukik  Angular Auriculate  Undulate 12 14 Dense Medium  Medium  Medium 
SwarnaRekha  Angular Auriculate  Undulate 10 15 Sparse Medium  Medium  Medium 
BCPG-1 Angular Cordate Undulate 5 13 Sparse Medium  Medium  Medium 
BCPG-3 Angular Auriculate  Undulate 3 13 Sparse Medium  Medium  Medium 
Annual Report 2021 -22 121 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.21: Characterization of 16 reference varieties of pointed gourd at ICAR-IIVR for 
various DUS characteristic during 2021-22 ( B) 
 
Reference 
varieties  Leaf 
lobes Leaf 
blade: 
Depth of 
lobing Petiole: 
length 
(cm) Flower: Sex 
type Fruit: 
Peduncle 
attachme
nt Fruit: 
Shape Fruit: Skin 
primary 
colour Fruit: 
Surface 
colour 
pattern Fruit: 
Glossi
ness 
KashiAlankar  Absent  Medium  Short Dioecious  Soft Spindle 
tapering  
 Light Green  
 Uniform  
 Glossy 
KashiSuphal  Absent  Medium  Short Dioecious  Hard Spindle 
tapering  
 Green Mottled  
 Non 
Glossy  
 
KashiAmulya  Absent  Medium  Short Dioecious  Soft Club 
shaped Green Mottled Glossy 
VRPG-220 Present Medium  Medium  Dioecious  Soft Spindle 
tapering Green Mottled Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-221 Present Medium  Medium  Dioecious  Hard Spindle 
tapering Dark green  Striped Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-103 Absent  Medium  Medium  Dioecious  Soft Oval Green Mottled Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-126 Absent  Medium  Medium  Dioecious  Soft Cylindrica
l Green Mottled Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-173 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Soft Elongated 
Spindle Light Green  
 Uniform  
Glossy  
VRPG-219 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Soft Spheroid Dark green  Striped Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-141 Absent  Shallow Short Dioecious  Soft Spindle Light Green  
 Uniform Glossy  
VRPG-176-1 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Soft Club 
shaped Green Striped Non 
Glossy  
VRPG-105 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Soft Oval Light Green  
 Striped Non 
Glossy  
SwarnaAlauki
k Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Hard Spindle 
tapering  
 Light Green  
 Uniform  
 Non 
Glossy  
SwarnaRekha  Absent  Shallow Medium Dioecious  Hard Spindle 
tapering  
 Dark green  Mottled Non 
Glossy  
BCPG-1 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Hard Oval Dark green  Striped Non 
Glossy  
BCPG-3 Absent  Shallow Medium  Dioecious  Hard Club 
shaped Dark green  Striped Non 
Glossy  
 
Table 3.21: Characterization of 16 reference varieties of pointed gourd at ICAR-IIVR for 
various DUS characteristic during 2021-22 ( C) 
 
Reference 
varieties  Fruit : 
Length 
(cm) Fruit: 
Diameter 
(cm)  (at the 
widest 
portion) Fruit size: 
Length/wi
dth ratio 
(cm) Fruit: Shape 
of apex at 
blossom end  Plant: Vine 
length (to be 
observed at full 
maturity) (m)  Seediness  Number of 
seeds/fruit  
KashiAlankar  Medium Small Large Pointed Medium Present Medium 
KashiSuphal  Medium Small Large Pointed Long Present Medium 
Annual Report 2021 -22 122 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 KashiAmulya  Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Very less  
VRPG-220 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
VRPG-221 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
VRPG-103 Small Small Small Flattened  Long Present Many 
VRPG-126 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
VRPG-173 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
VRPG-219 Small Large Small Depressed  Long Present Many 
VRPG-141 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
VRPG-176-1 Medium Small Medium Depressed  Long Present Many 
VRPG-105 Medium Small Small Flattened  Long Absent Many 
SwarnaAlaukik  Medium Small Medium Rounded Long Present Many 
SwarnaRekha  Medium Small Medium Rounded Long Present Many 
BCPG-1 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
BCPG-3 Medium Small Medium Pointed Long Present Many 
 
 
3.1.21.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR DRUMSTICK :  
 
 
UNIVERSITY OF HORTICULTURAL SCIENCES, BAGALKOT, KARNATAKA 
 
Moringa ( Moringa oleifera  Lam.), popularly known as drumstick, is known for its wide 
variety of nutraceutical values is the only genus of the Moringaceae family which is comprised of 13 
species, suggested to have originated from India and Africa (Amaglo et al., 2010). All Moringa 
species have been widely introduced into many tropical and subtropical countries including India as 
food, medicinal or ornamental plants, of which two species viz., M. oleifera  Lam. and M. concanensis 
Nimmo occur in India. It is an exceptionally nutritious vegetable tree with multiple uses and 
beneficial properties and has therefore been called a “miracle tree”or “one of the world’s most useful 
trees” Moringa has many medicinal properties. Almost all parts viz., root, bark, gum, leaf, fruit (pod), 
flower, seed and seed oil have been used for treatment of various inflammation and infectious 
diseases along with cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, haematological and hepatorenal, disorders. 
 
Realizing the importance of Moringa, PPV and FRA established DUS center for Drumstick at 
Department of Biotechnology and Crop Improvement, College of Horticulture Bagalkot. At this 
center, good number of moringa germplasm and released varieties have been collected and established 
in  three replication at DUS testing block. DUS testing guide lines have been developed and submitted 
to PPV& FRA. All the collected 21 genotypes were well characterized as per the DUS guidelines and 
maintained in good condition in field. Another 16 moringa genotypes have been collected from 
different geographical areas and multiplied in the nursery. These seedlings will be transplanted to 
main field. After the establishment, all the genotypes will be characterized as per the DUS testing 
guidelines. Apart from this, efforts have been made to create awareness about the various provisions 
of PPV and FRA act-2001 among the farmers, students and faculty members. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 123 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.22: Details of the reference varieties maintained at DUS center experimental block  
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sr. 
No. Name of the 
accession  Code Area of collection  State of collection  
1 PKM-01 MO_1 Periyakulam  Tamil Nadu  
2 PKM-02 MO_2 Periyakulam  Tamil Nadu  
3 Dhanraj MO_3 Dharwad(UASD campus)  Karnataka  
4 Bhagya (KDM -01) MO_4 Bagalkot(UHSB campus)  Karnataka  
5 Karwar-01 MO_5 Kumburda village, Karwar  Karnataka  
6 Badami-02 MO_6 Badami Karnataka  
7 Mysore-01 MO_7 Mysore Karnataka  
8 Mysore-02 MO_8 Mysore Karnataka  
9 Mysore-03 MO_9 Mysore Karnataka  
10 Yelwala-01 MO_10 Shettinayakanahalli, Mysore  Karnataka  
11 Shirdi-01 MO_11 Shirdi Maharashtra  
12 Tangi-01 MO_12 Tangi village  Orissa 
13 Bhubaneshwar -01 MO_13 Bhubaneshwar  Orissa 
14 Cuttack-01 MO_14 Cuttack Orissa 
15 Bagalkot-01 MO_15 Bagalkot Karnataka  
16 Thar-harsha MO_16 Vejalpur, Godhra  Gujarat 
17 Mandya-01 MO_17 Mandya Karnataka  
18 BG-1 MO_18 Bagalkot Karnataka  
19 BG-2 MO_19 Bagalkot Karnataka  
20 BG-3 MO_20 Bagalkot Karnataka  
21 BG-4 MO_21 Bagalkot Karnataka  
Annual Report 2021 -22 124 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 General View of DUS testing block of Moringa 
 
 
Newly collected Moringa  genotypes multiplication in Nursery. 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 125 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.22.   DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR COWPEA :  
 
DUS TESTING OF COWPEA AT UAS, DHARWAD 
 
a) Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2020-21, if any: (indicate no only) 
 
Crops New 
VCK FV Date of monitoring  1st 
year 
Entrie
s 2nd year  
Entries 
Cowpea 24 
- 12 Released Varieites 
+ 8 Germplasm 
accessions obtained 
from NBPGR, New 
Delhi - First year of the project 2021 -2022: 
Initiation of  the program for seed 
multiplication, purification during 
Kharif 2021, ensuing Rabi-Summer 
2021-22 
 
b) Key observations of the Monitoring team (1-2 points, max): ----Nil---- 
 
c) Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Mandated 
Crop 
Species Name or No. of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2020 -21 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Cowpea 12 varieties viz., C 152, RC 101, GC 3, DC 15, 
DCS 47-1, TPTC-29, KBC 5, KBC 6, KBC 8, KBC 
9, Bhagyalakshmi, Phule CP05040  Maintenance breeding – yes 
8 germplasm accessions viz., EC390219, 
EC390500, IC202918, IC202849, EC724153, 
EC724157, EC724160, EC738126)  Maintenance breeding – yes 
 
d) Salient Achievements (1 paragraph only) 
12 released varieties, 8 germplasm accessions of Cowpea were sown during Kharif 2021 and Rabi-
Summer 2021-22. The above enlisted varieties and germplasm accessions were maintained with 
utmost purity by ensuring strict self-pollination of 5 randomly selected plants using selfing nets  
followed by individual plant selection during harvest based on Cowpea DUS guidelines developed by 
PPVFRA, New Delhi. Observations on all the 24 DUS traits were recorded at appropriate crop growth 
stages as per the guidelines. Some of the important DUS traits recorded are leaf shape, leaf color, 
growth habit, seed shape, seed color etc.  Some important photographs depicting unique DUS traits 
are included (attached JPEG photos). In addition, total soluble protein percentage in cowpea grains 
was also estimated in 4 released varieties (DC 15, DCS 47-1, GC3 and RC 101) and 2 germplasm 
accessions (EC 724153 and EC 724157). 
Annual Report 2021 -22 126 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.23: Financial progress(pls also send a copy of AUC & SOE for FY 2020-21: Project 
has been initiated and started during FY 2021-22 at UAS, Dharwad)   
 
Items Unspent 
balance as 
on 1st 
April, 
2021 Interest 
accrued/other 
income for 
the DUS 
centre Budg
et FY 
2021-
22 Funds 
released in 
FY 2021-
22 (Rs.) Expendi
ture in 
FY 
2021-22 
(Rs.) Unspent 
balance as 
on 1st April 
2022 (Rs.)  
Manpower  
(indicate 
SRF/JRF/RA/TA etc 
and no of technical 
manpower engaged 
in each category)  0 0 0 1,75,000 0 1,75,000 
Non Recurring      
Recurring(field 
expenses and 
contingency)  0 0 2,00,000 1,11,629 88,371 
Others (Travelling 
allowance)   0 25,000 0 25,000 
Total 0 0 0 4,00,000 1,11,629 2,88,371 
 
Photographs showing distinct morphological features 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 127 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 128 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
3.1.23.   DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR FABA BEAN :  
 
DUS TESTING OF FABA BEAN AT ICAR-NBPGR, NEW DELHI 
 
During the year 2021-22, a new center for DUS testing of Faba bean was started at 
ICAR-NBPGR, New Delhi. The guidelines for the conduct of tests were consulted and seeds 
of nine reference varieties were taken out from National Gene Bank, ICAR-NBPGR, New 
Delhi. Simultaneously, letters were sent to the breeder’s (or Institutions) for fetching 
Breeders’ seed of seven released varieties of faba bean in India. These sixteen varieties were 
sown at ICAR-NBPGR, Issapur, Delhi farm along with one farmers’ variety (Trial Code 
2883/2677) provided by the PPV & FRA, New Delhi for multiplication/ recording of 
observations as per guidelines during Rabi 2021-22. The visual inspection and later plant 
emergence proved that the farmers’ variety didn’t belong to Faba bean crop. It was Dolichos 
bean and the same was communicated to the Registrar, PPV & FRA vide email dated 
10.11.2021. The genotypes were protected by insect-proof nets during the flowering period 
to avoid cross-pollination and to maintain the genetic purity. Data of 27 traits were collected 
on rest of the 16 varieties/ reference genotypes and after harvesting, the seeds were stored in 
Medium Term Storage at Division of Germplasm Evaluation, ICAR-NBPGR, New Delhi for 
growing during Rabi 2022-23. 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 129 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Field Pictures ICAR-NBPGR Farm, Issapur 
 
1. Reference varieties protected by net cages  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. ICAR dignitaries visiting Faba bean field at Issapur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. TC 2883 2677 Crop, Pods and Seeds. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 130 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.24.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR BETELVINE 
 
  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, BANGALORE   
It is the lead centre maintained 40 (4 released, 36 FV/VCK/germplasm).  DUS traits recorded in 
11 example varieties and 29 germplasm lines   
Table 3.24: Varieties under maintenance/Characterized:  
 
Crops  Name or No of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2020 -21 
Betelvine  40 (4 released, 36 FV/VCK/germplasm)   
  
   
DUS traits were recorded on eleven reference clones of betelvine grown under sesbania grandiflora  
L. (Sesbania) at ICAR-IIHR experimental farm. Observations were recorded on six quantitative traits 
viz. orthotropic stem internodal length(cm), number of Plagiotropic shoots/unit length(no/m), 
Plagiotropic leaf l/b ratio, Female inflorescence length(cm), Male inflorescence length(cm), Number 
of inflorescence /Plagiotropic shoots. 
The data on 11 qualitative characteristics i.e. Orthotropic leaf lamina colour, Orthotropic leaf apex 
shape, Orthotropic leaf texture, Plagiotropic stem colour, Plagiotropic leaf lamina shape, Plagiotropic 
leaf apex shape, Plagiotropic leaf texture, sex of the plant, Flowering habit, Female inflorescence 
colour, Number of inflorescence/Plagiotropic branch, as these traits were recorded  and  the data is 
presented below 
 
BIDHAN CHANDRA KRISHI VISWAVIDYALAYA, KALYANI IS THE 
COLLABORATING CENTRE OF  BETEL VINE. 
Germplasm augmentation and maintenance of example varieties under closed (Boroj) system of 
cultivation at BCKV 
The varieties of betelvine collected from different parts of the country are being maintained 
under boraja structure in two places at Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya (BCKV), 
Kalyani, Nadia, West Bengal.  In total 41 lines/varieties are maintained at this Co-nodal center of 
the project  
(Table-3.25). This includes all the example varieties mentioned in the DUS testing guidelines.Besides 
this 20 hybrid lines are being maintained at this center.  
      
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 131 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.25: List of  varieties of Piper betle  L.  maintained at   BCKV (Fig.1) 
    Bangla Cultivars     Sanchi Cultivars  
1. Bagerhat Bangla  16 Lakshman                      30 Halisahar Sanchi  
2 Bankura Bangla  17 Malishapur Bangla  31 Kalipatti 
3 Bhabani Bangla  18 Sada Bangla (Baheral)      32 Simurali Sanchi  
4 Bhainchigodi  19 Sada Bangla (Fatepur -1)    33 Gangarampur Sanchi   
5 Bhandarkhola  20 Sada Bangla (Fatepur -2)      Kapoori Cultivars  
6 Dogapan Sada  21 Sada Bangla 
(Gangarampur)  34 CARI-6 (AN) 
7 Ghanagette  22 SGM -1                               35 Kapoori ( Chinacheppali)      
8 Godi Bangla  23 Simurali Bhabna  36 Kapoori ( Doddipatla)      
9 Halisahar Jhal  24 Simurali Chamundali  37 Kapoori ( Pedacheppali)       
10 Harishpur Bangla  25 Simurali Deshi  38 Kapoori (Swarna)    
11 Jabalpur Bangla  26 Simurali Gole Bhabna  Meetha Cultivars  
12 Kadwa 27 Uttare Pan  39 Meetha-1  
13 Kal Bagini  28 CARI-2 (AN) 40 Meetha-2 
14 Kali Bangla  29 Bilhari 41 Meetha-3 
15 Kotki Bangla      
 
                            
                            
 
 
Fig.1. Betelvine varieties inside  Boreja  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.   Boreja (Outside & inside)  

Annual Report 2021 -22 132 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  DUS testing of candidate varieties 
This centre received about 20 cuttings of Huikhadan Deshi Kapuri Pan  in coco peat from Dr. Alice 
Tirkey of IGVK, Raipur around end of October, 2019. These cuttings were very thin and feeble. Most 
of the cuttings survived. So, it took much time to get proper stand. The test/ candidate variety, 
“Huikhadan Deshi Kapuri Pan” is a Kapoori type variety. The characters of this variety were 
thoroughly compared with four Kapoori varieties maintained in closed condition at Kalyani and 
presented in the table below.  The data were taken as per guidelines. 
                         
                   Growing vines of Huikhadan Deshi Kapuri Pan 
                 
                                             Leaf type 
 
3.1.25.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR AONLA 
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR SUBTROPICAL HORTICULTURE, LUCKNOW, UP 
  
Aonla varieties (8) planted in the field gene bank were characterized. The reference varieties (8) are 
being maintained in the field gene bank. DUS testing was performed on 1 candidate variety including 

Annual Report 2021 -22 133 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 five varieties submitted for registration to thr Authority. UP orchardist were sensitized about benefits 
of registering their varieties with PPVFRA. 
 
Table: 3.26:Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -2022 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Aonla 8 Yes 
 
 
 
Farmer variety Sanjeewani Pink 
 
 
3.1.26.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR BAEL  
 
ICAR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF SUBTROPICAL HORTICULTURE, LUCKNOW, UTTAR 
PRADESH 
During 2021-22 Bael (12) planted in the field gene bank were characterized. The reference varieties 
(15) are being maintained in the field gene bank. DUS testing was performed on 4 candidate varieties 
including three varieties submitted for registration to the Authority. UP orchardist were sensitized 
about benefits of registering their varieties with PPVFRA 
 
Table 3.27: Varieties under maintenance/characterized  
Mandated Crop 
species Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data submission  
(Maintenance breeding) Yes/No  
Bael 15  Yes 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 134 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
      Table 3.28: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Bael  - - 4 - 
 
 
Farmer variety Barsati Bael      Farmer variety Swati Bael 
 
3.1.27.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR JAMUN  
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR SUBTROPICAL HORTICUTURE, LUCKNOW   
 
It is the lead centre, during the year 2021-22  DUS Characterization of jamun accessions (34)  
available in the field gene bank was continued as per guidelines for the conduct of test for 
distinctiveness, uniformity and stability in jamun. Reference varieties of jamun (7) were maintained in 
the field gene bank under recommended cultural practices. Out of these, 11 accessions were 
characterized using DUS descriptors for tree growth and fruit quality traits. Farmers were sensitized 
for rgistering their varieties  under PPV & FRA. 
 
Table 3.29: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 Crop  Name or No of varie ties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
Jamun 34 
 
CENTRAL HORTICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION (ICAR-CIAH), VEJALPUR-
389340, GODHRA,  GUJARAT  
It is the collaborating centre for Jamun.  
During 2021-22 seven candidate/reference varieties (Goma Priyanka, Konkan Bardoli, CISHJ-42, 
Thar Kranti and Jamwant) were maintained in field repository at the Station, CHES, Godhra for 
testing of farmers variety. Some field views and salient features of varieties are as under: 
Goma Priyanka:   It is semi-dwarf, spreading growth habit, dense foliage and drooping branches, 
precocious bearer (starts flowering in 4th year) and suitable for high density planting. It starts 
flowering in the month of March, ripens in the fourth week of May and recorded 19.86 g average fruit 

Annual Report 2021 -22 135 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
weight, 85.06 per cent pulp, 16.80oBrix TSS, 0.38 % titratable acidity, 12.10 % total sugar, 6.11 % 
reducing sugar, 45.44 mg/100 g vitamin C. The fruit yield was 60.80 kg/plant during 8th year of 
plantation under rain-fed conditions of hot semi-arid ecosystem. 
 
Thar Kranti: It is spreading type, starts flowering in 3rd year, regular bearer, ripens in the fourth 
week of May and recorded 20.10 g average fruit weight, 85.57 per cent pulp and 17.10o Brix TSS. 
Mean fruit yield per plant was recorded 65.00 kg during 10th under rainfed conditions of hot semi-arid 
ecosystem. 
 
Jamwant:  It is a mid season maturing variety which is ready for harvest during the second week of 
June. The fruit is oblong having average weight 24.05 g, length 3.90 cm, diameter 3.03 cm, pulp 
92.26 % and TSS 16.4 ºBrix. The fruit yield was 68.70 kg/plant during 10th year of plantation under 
rain-fed conditions of hot semi-arid ecosystem. 
 
CISH J-42:  Its uniqueness lies in seedlessness (rudimentary seed) with high pulp content (97-98%). 
The fruit is round shaped and has average weight 6.87 g with a length of 2.57 cm. Fruits are good in 
test having 14-16 TSS 0Brix. Yield potential is 180-250 kg/tree. Fruits mature during second week o f 
June. 
 
Konkan Bahdoli:   It has heavy and cluster bearing habit with bold fruits, small seeds, high pulp to 
seed ratio, better table and processing qualities. The average weight of fruit is 14 to 16 g with 16 0Brix 
TSS. 
Table 3.30: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Name or No of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) Yes/No  
Goma Priyanka, Konkan Bardoli,  CISHJ -42, 
Thar Kranti and Jamwant   
Yes 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 136 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.28.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR GUAVA  
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR SUBTROPICAL HORTICUTURE, LUCKNOW  
During the year 2021-22 Guava varieties (29) planted in the field gene bank were characterized. The 
reference varieties (40) are being maintened in the field gene bank. DUS testing was performed on 3 
candidate varieties including two varieties submitted for registration and another one submitted to the 
authority.  Ten plants of candidate variety (Jarvi Red) were provided by the farmer Heenaben 
Jeyeshbhai Patel. The guava growers of Farrukhabad district, UP were sensitized about benefits of 
registering their varieties with PPV& FRA. Six farmers’ varieties of guava were collected from 
Farrukhabad (UP). 
 
            Table 3.31: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
 
Crops New VCK FV 
1st year entries  2nd year entries  
1 - -  1 
 
                        Table 3.32: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
 Crop  Name or No of varieties under maintenance in 2021 -22 
Guava  135 
 
3.1.29.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR LITCHI  
 
ICAR-NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE ON LITCHI  
 
During the year, the centre has 75 varieties under maintenance breeding. The centre is maintaining 6 
reference varieties in the DUS testing block. Total 22 germplasm were characterized as per DUS 
descriptors. There are no farmers’ variety at present in the DUS block. 
 
Table 3.33: Varieties under maintenance/characterized 
 
Mandated Crop Species  Name or no of varieties 
under maintenance 
breeding in 2021 -22  Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) Yes/No  
Litchi  75  Yes  
 
 
3.1.30.    DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR ARECANUT 
 
ICAR-Central Plantation Crops Research Institute (CPCRI),  Dakshina Kannada, Karnataka is the 
lead centre recorded morphological traits like plant height, stem height, crown length, crown shape, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 137 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 girth, internodal length, no. of leaves, no. of leaflets L, no. of leaflets R etc. and fresh nut and dry nut 
characteristics viz., fresh fruit weight, fruit length, fruit breadth, dry nut weight, dry kernel weight etc. 
from example/reference varieties at ICAR-CPCRI, Regional Station, Vittal.Fifteen arecanut 
example/reference varieties viz., Mangala, Sumangala, Sreemangala, Mohitnagar, Swarnamangala, 
Kahikuchi, Madhuramangala, Nalbari, South Kanara Local, Sirsi, Sagar, Thirthahalli, Hirehalli 
Dwarf, VTLAH-1 and VTLAH-2, were studied for vegetative growth characters under Assam 
condition at ICAR-CPCRI, Research Center, Kahikuchi, Guwahati. Among the varieties studied, 
Kahikuchi variety recorded the maximum seedling height (171.00 cm) 18 months after germination. 
Maximum girth at collar was recorded in the hybrid VTLAH-1 (2.83 cm). Number of leaves among 
the varieties varied from 3.29 to 5.00. VTLAH-2 recorded higher number of leaves (5.00) followed by 
VTLAH-1 (4.57) 
 
Table 3.34: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Crops Name or No. of varieties under 
maintenance in 2021 -22 Data submission 
(Maintenance):Yes/No  
Areca catechu  L. 16 Yes 
 
 
3.1.31.    DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR CASHEW  
 
 ICAR- DIRECTORATE OF CASHEW RESEARCH, PUTTUR, KARNATAKA  
The application for registration of a variety H-126, a jumbo nut with high uniformity in nut size 
(released from the institute) has been sent to the authority and its registration is pending. 
Facilitated the application of Vengurla-9 variety from Regional Fruit Research Station, 
Vengurla, Maharastra which is an AICRP center under ICAR- Directorate of Cashew Research, 
Puttur for registration.  
The application for H-130, a jumbo nut cashew hybrid (released from the institute) registration 
under PPV-FRA has been sent to the authority and its registration is pending 
The application for NRC-492 (Nethra Vaaman), a novel dwarf variety of cashew recently 
released at the Directorate has been sent to the authority and its registration is pending 
Forty four released varieties that are characterized for 68 characters are maintained in the 
National Cashew Field Gene Bank 
The cashew germplasm database ( https://cashew.icar.gov.in/dcr ) was enriched with 82 images 
belonging to 26 germplasm accessions. The database has been visited 4073 times as on 16-04-2022.  
The core collection of 61 cashew germplasm accessions established during 2017 was maintained 
following recommended agronomic practices and shape pruning.  
The block of 30 reference varieties is maintained  
Annual Report 2021 -22 138 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.35: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22:  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Cashew  -  H -130 NA NA NA 
Cashew Nethra Vaaman  NA NA NA NA 
 
 Table 3.36: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  
 
Crops Name or No of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
Cashew  A total of 44 varieties characterized and maintained. Database developed 
and a block of reference varities (30 No.) has been established and 
maintained  
 
Table 3.37: Applications filed with PPVFRA   
 
Crops No of 
Varieties  
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
1966 No of 
Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
2001 No of applications 
filed 
 
 
Extant 
Notified  New   
VCK Certific
ates 
issued Pending 
application
s Reasons for 
pendency  
Cashew  5 2 1 3 0 1 3 Under 
processing  
 
Photos of H-126 (Nethra Jumbo-1) variety of cashew  
 
 
 
Flowers of Nethra Jumbo -1  
 
 
Developed nut bunchs  

Annual Report 2021 -22 139 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
Nut and fruit bunches  
  
 
 
Kernels of Nethra Jumbo -1 
 
         Photos of Nethra Vaaman- A novel dwarf variety of cashew  
 
Tree habit   
Stem galling  

Annual Report 2021 -22 140 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Nut shape  Cashew apple  
 
 
 
 
3.1.32.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR CHIRONJI (BUCHANANIA LANZAN SPRENG.) AND 
TAMARIND (TAMARINDUS INDICA L.) 
 
CENTRAL HORTICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION (ICAR-CIAH), VEJALPUR, 
GODHRA, GUJARAT 
 
Tamarind:  Eleven reference varieties of tamarind namely Goma Prateek, Pratisthan, T-263, PKM-1, 
Ajanta, DTS-1, Red Type, Sweet Type, Bantoor, Urigum and CHEST-10 were maintained. 
 
Chironji: Ten varieties/ genotypes of chironji namely Thar Priya, CHESC-1, CHESC-2 CHESC-3, 
CHESC-4 CHESC-5, CHESC-6 CHESC-8, CHESC-9, CHESC-10 were maintained in the field. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fruiting pattern of chironji cv  Thar Priya 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 141 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
  Harvested fruit and fruiting pattern of Tamarind cv.  Goma Prateek 
 
 
3.1.33.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR MULBERRY 
 
CSRTI, CENTRAL SILK BOARD (MINISTRY OF TEXTILES), MYSORE 
  
It is the lead centre. The DUS test plot with 52 accessions in three replications was maintained with 
regular weeding, irrigation, FYM application, regular pruning and other farm operations.  
 
Example genotypes (34) were DUS characterized for 35 characters. 
Candidate varieties (G-4, G-2, AR-12, RC-1, MSG-2 and Sahana) were planted in three 
replications with 8 plants in each replication at DUS test plot. 
 
One round of DUS testing of candidate (G4, G2, RC1, AR12, Sahana and MSG2) and reference 
varieties at demonstration plot for 35 DUS characteristics was completed.  
 
Raised the nursery for 13 reference and 6 candidate varieties in RCBD with 3 replications for 
recording survival % and rooting % of genotypes. 
 
Recorded survival data of genotypes after 90 days of growth. 
 
Mulberry cuttings of Vishwa (DD), TG, Suvarna-1, Suvarna-2, Suvarna-3 were procured from 
KSSRDI, Thalagattapura, Banaglore to increase the reference collection of the mulberry 
genotypes. 
 
Isolated genomic DNA from 52 accessions which include example genotypes, reference and 
candidate varieties. 
 
Completed DNA quantification of 52 accessions which include example genotypes, reference and 
candidate varieties. 
 
Based on DNA quantification results, the DNA stock solutions were diluted to a uniform 
concentration of 40 ng/μl for PCR amplification.  
Reference and candidate varieties were characterized with 5 SSR markers.  

Annual Report 2021 -22 142 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Mulberry nursery of candidate and Reference varieties raised to record survival % of cuttings  
 
 
Mulberry varieties of KSSRDI, Thalagattapura  
 
 
3.1.34.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR POPLAR 
 
DR YSP UHF, NAUNI, SOLAN  
 
The 15 Clones were maintained in the experimental area of the Department of Tree 
Improvement and Genetic Resources, Dr YSP UHF Nauni, Solan.  The leaf data was recorded in the 
month of August, 2021 and growth data in the month of December. The data was analyzed in the 
month of February 2022. The DUS character for each clone of Poplar ( Populus spp.) under 
maintenance testing were validated according to the guidelines which have already been published by 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Right Authority. 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 143 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.38: No. of variety undergone maintenance breeding / characterization / progress of 
development of DUS guidelines 
Name of the 
species No of varieties  Source (own 
released/ICAR/SAU)  
Populus 
deltoides Source Clones 
SAU, Forest Deptt, 
WIMCO 
 
 
 
 Uttarakhand Forest  Department  L-61/05, L-30/06, L-
62/84, G-48 
Wimco Seedlings Ruderpur, 
UK S7 C15, S7 C8,WSL-22, 
WSL-39 
Department of TIGR, UHF, 
Nauni 6503, 5503, 1007, L -
200/86 
Department of Forestry PAU, 
Ludhiana PL-3, PL-6, PL-7 
Total 15 
 
 
3.1.35.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR WILLOW 
 
Y.S. PARMAR UNIVERSITY OF HORTICULTURE & FORESTRY, NAUNI, SOLAN, HP  
During the year 2021-22 the 17 varieties/clones were maintained in the experimental area of the 
department. The leaf data was recorded in the month of August, 2021, growth data in the month of 
December, 2021 and sprouting in the month of January 2022. The data was analyzed in the month of 
February, 2022. The DUS characters for each variety of willow ( Salix spp.) under maintenance testing 
were validated according to the guidelines which have already been published by Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority .  
The applications of four farmer varieties (REG/2021/0128 denomination DOODER-1; 
REG/2021/0129 denomination Narag-1; REG/2021/0130 denomination SHOTTI-1; REG/2021/031 
denomination Sanog-1) were received and propagules were collected and replicated in the nursery for 
DUS testing during 2022-23. 
 
Table 3.39: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22   
(Indicate no. only) = 4 
 
Crops New 
VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st 
year 
entrie
s 2nd 
year 
entries  
Willow ( Salix 
species)    1. DOODER -I  
Annual Report 2021 -22 144 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
     2. NARAG-I  
    3. SHOTTI-I  
    4. SANOG-I  
 
Table 3.40: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
  
Mandated 
Crop Species  Name or No of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Willow ( Salix 
species) (17 Varieties)  
(PN-731, SI-64-016, PN-227, FLS, SI -64-
017, SI-63-007, 006/05, Ghagas, J -799,NZ-
1140, 131/25, J -194, J-795, AUSTREE, 
Kashmiri local,V -99, DEVMATA)  Yes 
 
 
3.1.36.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR EUCALYPTUS AND CASUARINA 
 
INSTITUTE OF FOREST GENETICS & TREE BREEDING, COIMBATORE, TAMIL NADU 
 
  Eucalyptus DUS Centre  
The clonal trials of Eucalyptus camaldulensis planted at different locations such as Karunya, 
Marakkanam, Kallakurichi, IFGTB and Salem were evaluated for both quantitative (MG) and 
qualitative traits (VS). The DUS Characterization of reference clones were done according to the 33 
morphological characters described in PPVFRA guidelines.  
The qualitative assessment of characters such as Mature Fresh, dried and Rhyditome bark colours, 
Crown shape, primary branch attitude, Bark peeling type, Mature leaf shapes, Scar shapes, scar 
periphery projection, Trunk Waxiness, Trunk clear bole height, Bark texture, Annual peeling were 
observed and recorded for all replications in their respective locations. The quantitative 
assessment(MG) referred as Measurable traits such as mature leaf length, mature leaf area, mature 
leaf breadth, mature petiole length, mature blade ratio were observed and analyzed through Image 
Analyzer in Laboratory. Samples of flowers, fruits, and inflorescence were collected and recorded. 
Furthermore, the visual documentation was maintained for all different locations of all reference 
clones. This is used for grouping and recording DUS Matrix for future references. 
 
Karunya Nagar Clonal Trial:  
The clonal trial of Eucalyptus camaldulensis was situated in Karunya nagar, Coimbatore.  
The Field Visit was conducted for assessing the DUS characters of the reference clones and IFGTB 
released clones C3, C6, C7, C9, C14, C15, C16, C19, C20, C22, C33, C53 (EC-1), C63, C68, C75, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 145 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 C86, C92, C94, C100, C101, C111( EC-3), C124, C154, C157, C187, C188, C191, C207 planted in 
Randomized Block Design with spacing of 3m x 2m.  
 
                     Kurumbapatti Research Station, Salem  
The Eucalyptus camaldulensis clonal seed orchard is situated in Kurumbapatti Research station, 
Salem.  
The field visit was conducted to observe and assess DUS (Distinctness, Uniformity, and Stability) of 
10 Reference Clones of Eucalyptus camaldulensis (CSO) C14, C100, C188, C123, C187, C191, C7, 
C9, C75, and C63 planted in Randomized Block Design, with spacing: 3m x 2m.  
 
 
TAFCORN Plantation, Marakkanam  
The TAFCORN Plantation situated in Thiyagadurgam in Kallakurichi, Randomized block design with 
spacing 3m x 2m.  
The field trip was conducted to document the Eucalyptus camaldulensis of 18 reference clones and to 
collect samples of Leaves, Buds and Fruits of all four replications. The reference clones were C53, 
C111, C101, C191, C123, C63, C14, C100, C188, C207, C124, C9, C69, C303, C307, C301, C187, 
and C198.  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 146 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
TAFCORN Plantation, Thiyagadurgam, Kallakurichi  
The TAFCORN Plantation situated in Thiyagadurgam in Kallakurichi, Randomized block design with 
spacing 3m x 2m.  
The Field Visit was conducted for assessing the DUS characters of the 15 reference clones and 
IFGTB released clones C123, C207, C101, C9, C63, C53, C188, C111, C7, C19, C196, C100, C124, 
C14 and C16.  
 
 
 
 
Works carried out in DUS centre - Casuarina  
The registration process was completed for six new varieties of Casuarina and certificates have been 
issued by the Authority. This is the first instance of registration for forestry crops in the country. The 
details of the registered varieties are given below. 
 
 
S. No.  Name of the 
variety  PPVFRA 
Registration 
Number  Date of issue of 
certificate  
1  IFGTB-CJ-9  REG/2015/1658  16.06.2021  
2  IFGTB-CH-1  REG/2017/1564  16.06.2021  

Annual Report 2021 -22 147 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3  IFGTB-CH-2  REG/2017/1565  16.06.2021  
4  IFGTB-CH-3  REG/2017/1566  02.07.2021  
5  IFGTB-CH-4  REG/2017/1567  02.07.2021  
6  IFGTB-CH-5  REG/2017/1568  02.07.2021  
 
Organizations involved in varietal development for Casuarina have been contacted and for possible 
registrations of varieties developed by them. In particular, paper industries were requested to register 
the varieties developed by them before deploying them in their farm forestry programmes. It is 
expected more applications for registrations will be submitted in the next few years. The reference 
collection of released and example varieties are being maintained in Coimbatore and Chennai 
Stations. The stocking is maintained by continuously propagating the varieties and replanting them in 
the collection. At present more than around 110 varieties / clones are maintained in two locations. 
DUS characters are recorded for the registered and example varieties.  
 
Casuarina hybrid clones multiplied and planted by farmers 
 
 
3.1.37.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR BER 
 
ICAR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR ARID HORTICULTURE, BIKANER, RAJASTHAN IS 
THE LEAD CENTRE FOR DUS TESTING IN BER VARIETIES. 
During the year 2021-22 twenty-five references, 85 example varieties, and 21 new ber genotypes have 
been characterized and maintained in the field gene bank of ICAR-CIAH, Bikaner. Eight claimed 
varieties from Jai Durga Krishak Club, VPO-Lakhuri, Janjgeer-Champa, Raipur scion bud wood was 
received for raising of saplings for onwards testing (as per DUS guideline) the claimed material in this 
ecosystem, but during postage delay and improper handling all budded saplings could not survive in 
the nursery. In reference ber varieties apart from field maintenance and DUS parameters study 
additionally recorded some flowering and fruit set pattern data as well as frost injury levels and some 
ancillary observations. Other germplasm were characterized also as per DUS guidelines with the 

Annual Report 2021 -22 148 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 objective to compare a wide range of Zizyphus material in the future. In the reporting year, 21 new 
germplasm were characterized morphometrically for two consecutive years (any doubt will be 
characterized with molecular protocol).      
Table 3.40: Details of the varieties under maintenance/characterized:   
 
Crops Name or No. of varieties under maintenance  as reference varieties  Data 
submission  
Ber 25 varieties  : Gola, Seb, Banarasi Karaka, Banarasi Pawandi, Chhuhara, 
Kaithali, Mundia, Illaichi, Reshmi, Sanur -5, Umran, ZG -3, Jogia, 
Chhuhara Bawal, Narma, Kismish, Safeda Rohtak, Mehrun, Kala Gola, 
Katha Phal, Dharki No.1, Lakhan, Gularbasi, Safeda Selection,Tikadi  Yes 
 
 
Crops Name or No. of varieties under characterized as new varieties   
Ber 21 varieties  : From germplasm block BC series (14), Jodhpur series  (6) 
and one cross (Sebx Katha) were described as per DUS descriptor  Yes 
 
Table 3.41: Details of DUS testing of example varieties:   
Crops Name or No. of varieties as example varieties   
Ber 85 varieties  : Akharota, Aliganj, Alwar Desi, B. S. 75 -1, B. S. 75 -2, B. S. 
75-3, Badami, Bagwadi, Bahadurgrhi, Banarasi, Banarasi Karaka, 
Banarasi Pa wandi, Bawal Selection, Betawadi, Betawadi Hetal, CAZARI 
Gola, Chandni (Supari), Chhuhara, Chhuhara Bawal, Chirana -1, Dandan, 
Dharki No. 1, Dharki No. 2, Foliso Alwari, Glori, Gola, Gola Gurgoan, 
Golar, Goma Kirti, Gorafa, Gularbasi, Illaichi, Jhajjar Sele ction, Jogia, 
Kaithli, Kakrola Gola, Kala Gola, Kali, Katha, Katha Bombay, Katha 
Phal, Katha, Rajasthan, Kheera, Laddu, Lakhan, Maharwali, Mehrun, 
Mundia, Mundia Murhera, Nalgarhi, Narikali, Narma, Neharu (Mandal), 
Nonki, Panthani, Popular Gola, Reshmi, Ro hataki Gola, Safar Chandani, 
Safeda, Safeda Rohatak, Safeda Selection, Sandura Narnol, Sandura No. 
1,Sanur-1,Sanur-2, Sanur -3, Sanur -4,Sanur-5, Sanur -6,Sauveda,Seb, 
Shamber, Sua, Surati, Tesbetes, Thar Bhubhraj, Thar Sevika, Thornless, 
Tikadi, Umran, Villi ati, ZG-1, ZG-2, ZG-3 No 
 
New ber genotype under characterization (During 2021-22)  
Along with 25 References varieties with   BC (14), Jodhpur (6) series and Seb x Katha  (P1) 
germplasm were evaluated  as  per DUS discraptor  consecutively for two years  and being 
maintained at National Active Germplasm site of ber at ICAR-CIAH, Bikaner. 
S.No. Name of varieties  Source of planting material  
1.  BC1P1 Back cross population at CIAH, 
Bikaner  2.  BC1P2 
3.  BC1P3 
Annual Report 2021 -22 149 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 4.  BC1P4 
5.  BC1P5 
6.  BC1P6 
7.  BC1P7 
8.  BC1P8 
9.  BC1P9 
10.  BC1P10 
11.  BC1P11 
12.  BC1P12 
13.  BC1P13 
14.  BC1P14 
15.  Jodhpur-1 Collected and maintained in field 
repository at CIAH, Bikaner  16.  Jodhpur-3 
17.  Jodhpur-4 
18.  Jodhpur-5 
19.  Jodhpur-6 
20.  Jodhpur-7 
21.  Seb x Katha (P2)  Crossing progeny at CIAH, 
Bikaner 
  
3.1.38.   DUS TESTING CENTER FOR CASSAVA, SWEET POTATO, GREATER YAM, 
YAM BEAN, ELEPHANT FOOT YAM  AND TARO  
 
 ICAR – CENTRAL TUBER CROPS RESEARCH INSTITUTE, BHUBANESWAR, ODISHA 
 
I
t is the lead centre for DUS testing of tuber crops . 
 
During the year 2021-22 maintained the field gene bank with 21 taro reference varieties and 18 
no’s of Elephant Foot Yam reference varieties.  Planting materials of varieties/clones were 
multiplied. 
 
Characterization of two candidate varieties ( Guchedar and Narendra Ghuiya)  received from 
PPVFRA has been done for Second year. 
 
Two new candidate varieties GiddiMudli (Dasheen Taro)  and PhoolaMudli (Dasheen Taro)  
were received on 22.12.2021 from Uttar Kannada, Karnataka for characterization. Both the 
lines were planted at field gene bank for multiplication. 
 
Three local taro lines and two local EFY lines were planted in the field and characterizations 
have been done as per DUS guidelines for second year. 
 
Individual distinct characters of all the local lines have been identified and documented. 
 
As cyclone prone area conserving Taro and EFY varieties under in vitro condition. Tissue 
Annual Report 2021 -22 150 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
cultured raised planting materials were acclimatized and being maintained at net house. 
 
Table 3.42: Taro DUS entries (Two) received from PPVFRA New Delhi for characterization 
 
SL 
NO Local name of the TARO 
lines Person name  REMARKS  
1. GiddiMudli (Dasheen 
Taro)  Chaitanya P. Gavada Village: 
Kateli, PO: Kumbarwada, Uttar 
Kannada, Karnataka  Received on 22.12.21 and  
Planted for tuber 
multiplication  
2. PhoolaMudli (Dasheen 
Taro) ChandrakantGavada Village: 
Ambarde, PO:Joida, Uttar Kannada, 
Karnataka  Received on 22.12.21 and  
Planted for tuber 
multiplication  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taro: (a-d): GiddiMudliand (e-h): PhoolaMudli  
 
Table 3.43: Taro DUS entries (Two) received from PPVFRA New Delhi and Characterized 
 
SL 
NO Local name of the TARO 
lines Person name  Remarks  
1. Guchedar Ragupat Singh Village: Samathal, 
PO: Sayodara, Muradabad, UP  Characterization 
has been done for 
Second year.  
2. Narendra Ghuiya  Narendra Kumar Kushwaha  Characterization 
has been done for 
Second year.  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 151 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Cassava and  Sweet potato 
 
Maintaining the field gene bank with 43 sweet potato reference varieties and 17 no’s of 
Cassava reference varieties.Planting materials of varieties/clones were multiplied.  
Planted one farmers variety (Manna) received from CTCRI, Kerala for maintaining at the field 
gene bank. Individual distinct characters of all the reference lines have been identified and 
documented. As cyclone prone area conserving sweet potato and cassava varieties under in 
vitro condition. Tissue cultured raised planting materials were acclimatized and being 
maintained at net house. 
 
  A total of 43 sweet potato varieties have been maintained in field and gene bank of   Regional 
centre, ICAR-Central Tuber Crops Research Institute, Bhubaneswar. Morphological 
characterization of 43 sweet potato varieties have been carried out. 
In-vitro conservation has been carried out. 
 
 
 
Filed gene bank of sweet potato varieties at regional Centre, ICAR-CTCRI, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha

Annual Report 2021 -22 152 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
                                         Fig. In vitro conservation of tropical tuber crops 
 
ICAR-CENTRAL TUBER CROP RESEARCH INSTITUTE   
 
It is the collaborating centre for DUS testing of tuber crops. 
During 2021-22 the gene bank of reference varieties of greater yam (461) and yam bean (24) are 
being conserved in the field. Ten new collections of greater yam were made. The DUS testing 
guidelines of both greater yam and yam bean were standardized. For the DUS testing of greater 
yam, 20 characteristics were selected, of which five characteristics viz., petiole colour, leaf 
shape, tuber shape, tuber cortex colour and tuber flesh colour were identified as grouping traits.  
Yam bean DUS test guidelines included 17 characteristics. Four characteristics viz., flower 
colour, pod length, tuber shape and seed shape were selected as grouping traits. 10 yam bean 
lines were maintained in the field gene bank. The DUS testing guidelines have been developed 
and published in the PPVFRA website. All the reference varieties were replanted.  
Forms for the registration of 4 varieties of greater yam were prepared and submitted under extant 
variety category and are under revision.  
The gene bank of reference varieties of cassava (55) and sweet potato (52) are being 
conserved in the field. All the reference varieties were harvested and replanted. Farmers were 
sensitized to start registration of cassava and sweet potato varieties. One farmer, Shri. John from 

Annual Report 2021 -22 153 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Kozhikode, Kerala sent the planting material of one promising farmers’ variety of cassava named 
Manna for registration and it was planted in the field for characterization and registration. 
Planting material was send to Co Nodal Centre, Bhubaneswar. Received planting material of two 
sweet potato varieties from a farmer , Mr.Tipson, for registration. Conducted trials and recorded 
DUS traits.The digital  database of sweet potato has been updated. 
Forms for the registration of 4 varieties of greater yam were prepared and submitted under 
extant variety category and are under revision 
 
Table 3.44: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of 
varieties under 
maintenance breeding 
in  Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Cassava 55 Completed Data will be 
submitted by July 31, 2022  
Sweet potato  52 - 
Greater yam  485 Completed Data will be 
submitted by July 31, 2022  
Yam bean  7 - 
 
Table 3.45: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2020-21 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd 
year  
entries  
Greater Yam     4 March2022 -Dec 2022  
Yam bean       
Greater Yam     1 Sept 2021 -May 2022  
Sweet potato     2 Jan 2022-May2022  
 
 
3.1.39.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR MANDARIN, SWEET ORANGE, ACID LIME  
 
ICAR – CENTRAL CITRUS RESEARCH INSTITUTE, NAGPUR, MAHARASHTRA   
 
It is the lead centre  during 2021-22  maintenance breeding as per DUS norms is being conducted for 
mandated crops viz. Mandarin, Sweet orange, Acid lime. 
 
Table 3.46: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Annual Report 2021 -22 154 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2020 -21 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Mandarin NRCC Nagpur Mandarin Seedless – 4 (N - 4), 
Mudkhed seedless, Sikkim man darin, 
Darjeeling mandarin, N -28, N-34, N-38 In progress  
Sweet orange  M3, M4, M8, Mosambi, Sathgudi  In progress  
Acid lime Vikram, Pramalini, Sai Sharbati, NRCC Niboo 
– 2, NRCC Niboo – 3, NRCC Niboo – 4, 
NRCC Niboo – 5, NRCC Acid Lime – 7 and 
NRCC Acid Lime - 8 In progress  
 
 
3.1.40.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR TEMPERATE FRUITS AND NUTS  
 
ICAR- CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF TEMPERATE HORTICULTURE,   SRINAGAR IS THE 
DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR VIZ. APPLE, PEAR, PEACH, PLUM , APRICOT , CHERRY, 
ALMOND, WALNUT AND STRAWBERRY. 
 
During the reporting period 2021-22 reference varieties characterized and maintained are 
tabulated as mentioned below at ICAR-CITH, Srinagar. 
 
Table 3.47: Reference varieties maintained at ICAR-CITH, Srinagar : 
 
Crops No. of varieties under maintenance and characterized as per 
DUS descriptor during 2021 -22 
Apple 120 
Pear 21 
Walnut 27 
Almond 13 
Peach 31 
Plum 25 
Apricot 18 
Cherry 10 
Strawberry  107 
 
              Table 3.48: Reference varieties characterized : 
 
Crops No. of varieties under maintenance  and characterized as 
per DUS descriptor during 2021 -22 
Apple 35 
Walnut 27 
Almond 13 
Annual Report 2021 -22 155 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
 
              Table 3.49:  List of entries tested during 2021 
 
Crop: Number and list of entries  
Peach  03 
Reg/2016/1122; Reg/2016/1124; Reg/2016/1125  
Walnut 05 
Reg/2015/1527; Reg/2016/1095; Reg/2016/1096; Reg/2016/1097; 
Reg/2016/1098  
Pear 01 
Reg/2016/1128 (Partial testing)  
Apple 01 
Reg/2019/121  
 
 
                   Table 3.50: Candidate varieties tested : 
Crops No. of candidate varieties 
tested as per DUS 
descriptor during 2021 -22 Place Date of 
monitoring  
Walnut 05   
Hemlata  Jyamla, Kunihar, 
Solan, HP  2nd September, 
2021 
Rkangstar Hasa and 
Chunstar,  Hunderman, 
Kargil 23rd September, 
2021 
Singay and Zangstar  Sanjak, Kargil  24th September, 
2021 
Peach 03   
Shambyar, and Karpota  Sanjak, Kargil  24th September, 
2021 
Snupo Takushu  Dargoo, Kargil  24th September, 
2021 
Apple 01   
Kanwar Majholi Selection -
1 Majholi, Theog, 
Shimla, HP  3rd September, 
2021 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 156 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.41.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR BANANA 
 
ICAR- NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE FOR BANANA, TIRUCHIRAPALLI, TAMIL 
NADU 
 
During the year 2021-22 maintained the soil fertility, the whole set of reference accessions have been 
shifted to new area and planted with six replications each. 
DUS characterization has been completed for two farmers varieties viz., Chingan and Semmatti and in 
progress for Thottuchingan and Kudhiraival Chingan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Field view of  newly replanted DUS accessions  
 
 
3.1.42.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR NONI 
 
ICAR- CENTRAL ISLAND AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PORT BLAIR 
During the year 2021 -22 regular month wise fruit yield was recorded from the cluster bearing 
noni accession identified from noni plantation maintained at Garacharma Research Farm of the 

Annual Report 2021 -22 157 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
ICAR- CIARI. The average fruit yield of 2.86 kg/tree/month and mean single fruit weight of 297 gm 
was recorded from the tree. The fruit seed, pulp and pulp recovery was estimated and recorded viz., 
percentage of seed (10.77), percentage of pulp (91.90) and percentage  of fruit pulp recovery (69.96).  
 The cluster bearing accession was submitted to the ICAR-NBPGR, New Delhi and obtained 
IC number 0641086 . The cluster bearing noni germplasm Distinctness, Uniformity and Stability 
(DUS) characterization viz., 12 tree morphology and 24 fruit characters were documented. This 
characterization will be useful to release this as a variety for the benefit of the Island farmers to 
improve their farm income.  
Registration of noni germplasm 
Two noni germplasms (TRA-1 and HD-6) registration proforma were prepared and submitted to 
ICAR-NBPGR, New Delhi for their specific traits along with the seeds for depositing in the National 
active germplasm center for its conservation. 
Table 3.51: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -2022 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Noni (Morinda 
citrifolia) CIARI Sampada, CIARI, Sanjivini, 
CIARI, Rakshak and CIARI Samrudhi  Maintained  
Cluster bearing noni Maintained  
Cluster bearing noni genotype 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.43.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR SEED SPICE CROPS (CORIANDER, FENUGREEK, 
FENNEL & CUMIN) 
 
ICAR- NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE ON SEED SPICES, AJMER   
It is the lead centre  
During the year 2021-22 DUS experiment of major seed spices (coriander, fenugreek, fennel and 
cumin) was laid out at NRCSS, Ajmer, Rajasthan. In this experiment 35 varieties of coriander, (26 
Annual Report 2021 -22 158 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 references and 1 candidate), 22 varieties of fenugreek (3 candidate), 21 varieties of fennel, 9 varieties 
of cumin were included for maintenance breeding. The DUS guidelines in fennel and cumin seed 
spices were developed and published in PPV & FRA journal. The DUS guidelines in five minor crops 
(Ajwain, Celery, Dill, Anise & Nigella) of seed spices were developed and Published in PPV & FRA, 
Plant Variety Journal. Testing of candidate variety in coriander 1 and fenugreek 3. 
Table 3.52: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
Coriander  - 1 - -  
Fenugreek  1 2 - -  
 
Table 3.53: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated 
Crop Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Coriander  27 yes 
Fenugreek  22 yes 
 
     Table 3.54: List/ No. of varieties (crop wise) under maintenance breeding 
 
S. 
No Crop species  Source of 
varieties Name of the varieties  
1. Coriander 
(Coriandrum 
sativum L.), 
 ICAR & 
SAU’S Swathi, Sadhan, Sudha,GCr -2,GCr-1, RCr-684, 
RCr-446 RCr-435, RCr-436,  RCr -20, RCr-41, Co-
1,  Co -2, Co-3, Co-4, HisarAnand, Hisar 
Sughandha, Hisar Surbhi, Pant Haritma, Rajendra 
Swathi, ACr -1, Azad Dhania, Jd -1, ACr-2, ACr-3, 
Sindhu & AGCr -1 (Total varieties -27) 
2. Fenugreek  
(Trigonella 
foenumgraecum
L.), ICAR & 
SAU’S GM-2, RMt-143, Azad Methi, AM -2, RMt-
303,CO-2, Pant Ragini, RMt -1, Lem Selection, 
Hisar Suvarna, AM -1, Rajendra Kranti, Hisar 
Madhavi, RMt -305, Hisar Sonali, RMt -351, GM-1, 
RMt-361, AFg-3, AFg-4, AFg-5 & AFg -6 (Total 
varieties -22) 
3. Fennel ICAR & Hisar Swarup, AF -1, GF-12, Pant Madurika, GF -2, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 159 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 (Foeniculum 
vulgare  MILL .) SAU’S RF-125, RF-178, RF-101, Rajendra Saurabh, Azad 
Saunf-1, RF-205, RF-281, RF-145, CO-1, RF-143, 
RF-157 GF-11,  AF-2 & AF-3 (Total varieties -20) 
4. Cumin ( 
Cuminum 
cyminum)  ICAR & 
SAU’S GC-1, GC-2, GC-3, GC-4, RZ-19, RZ-223, RZ-
209, RZ-341 &RZ -345 (Total varieties -09) 
 
Field view of Fenugreek field                                   DUS experiment of major seed spices        
 
 
ICAR- DIRECTORATE OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS RESEARCH, 
BORIAVI, ANAND  
 
As Collaborating Centre for seed spices and as Nodal centre for Kalmegh and Isabgol 
 
a. Coriande r: 
During 2021 -22, one Farmers’ variety of Coriander was tested along with five reference varieties 
received from the nodal centre i.e., ICAR-NRCSS, Ajmer  (Table 3.47). The data were sent to the 
nodal centre for compilation.  
Table 3.55: List of new entries of Coriander ( Coriandrum sativum )  
Sl.No. Candidate varieties  Reference varieties  
1.  Proza ACr-1 
Azad Dhaniya  
CO 2 (Reference variety)  
Hisar Anand  
R Cr 20 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 160 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 b. Methi ( Trigonellafoenum-graecum  L.)  
During 2021 -22, three Farmers’ varieties of methi along with four reference varieties received from 
the nodal centre i.e., ICAR-NRCSS, Ajmer were tested. The data were sent to the nodal centre for 
compilation.  
Table 3.56: List of entries of Methi  ( Trigonellafoenum-graecum  L.)  
Sl.No. Candidate varieties  Reference varieties  
1.  FV  Suganditmethi (REG/2015/391)  AFg-1 
2. FV Jagriti -1 (REG/2018/293)  CO 2 (Reference variety)  
3. FV  (2883/2416)  GM-1 
  Hisar Sonali  
 
Maintenance of example/reference varieties of Isabgol ( Plantago ovata)  
During the year 2021 -22, 11example varieties of Isabgol (Plantago ovata) i.e. DMAPR PO1, 
DMAPR PO2, DMAPR PO3, DMAPR PO4, DMAPR PO5, DMAPR PO6, DMAPR PO7, DMAPR 
PO8, DMAPR PO9, DMAPR PO10 and DMAPR PO11 were maintained. (Data submitted 
separately).  
 
Maintenance of reference/example varieties of Kalmegh ( Andrographis paniculata) . 
 The major characteristics finalized for descriptors for DUS testing of kalmeghwere leaf colour (light 
green, green or dark green),  leaf lamina shape (lanceolate,  elliptical, ovate/ovate 
lanceolate/elliptical); leaf lamina length (short, long), leaf lamina breadth (narrow, medium, broad); 
stem shoot apex (tender leaf grouped at apex, tender leaf not grouped at apex), leaf lamina (inwardly 
closed or outwardly curved); leaf lamina surface (smooth, wrinkled); stem branching pattern (erect, 
spreading); anthesis pattern (early, medium and late); spikelet type (flower buds closely arranged or 
distantly arranged); plant main axis growth habit (erect or prostrate); stem internode length (short, 
long); plant canopy shape (columnar, bushy/globular, pyramidal); plant height (short, medium, tall); 
leaf andrographolide content (low, medium, high). Accordingly, 24 reference/example varieties 
identified were maintained during the kharif 2021  
 
3.1.44.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR MANGO  
 
ICAR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR SUBTROPICAL HORTICULTURE, LUCKNOW  
 
It is the lead centre. 
During the year 2021-22  DUS testing was performed and data submitted for 23 farmer's mango 
varieties out of 37 varieties submitted earlier for registration. DUS characterization of mango varieties 
(133) available in the field gene bank. The reference and farmer varieties (415) were maintained. One 
awareness campaign for registration of mango farmers varieties was held in the area where farmer's 
varieties of mango exist. Training and awareness programs were held to educate farmers about the 
Annual Report 2021 -22 161 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 existing varieties and the benefits of registering their varieties with PPVFRA. The registration 
proposal for one mango farmers’ variety ‘Nehal Pasand’ was submitted. 
 
            Table 3.57: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22:  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year 
entries  
Mango 01 -  23 
(variety)  
 
Table 3.58: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Mandated 
Crop 
Species Name or No. of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission 
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Mango 415 (No. of varieties under maintenance 
and characterized)  No 
 
Table 3.59: Applications filed with PPV& FRA   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, BANGALORE  
 
It is collaborating centre for DUS testing of Mango  
Inflorescence characteristics  
 
During the period under report, the inflorescence characteristics viz., Time of flowering, 
inflorescence length, inflorescence diameter, inflorescence ratio, and anthocyanin coloration of 
axis and branches of 10 varieties were recorded as per the DUS guidelines. The inflorescence 
length was maximum in Tajmahal (36.00 cm) whereas the minimum inflorescence length 
recorded in the variety Morish Badam (24.40 cm). The width ranged from 15.8 cm in Manjbe 
Pasand to 26.4 cm in Kawa Pasand. The inflorescence anthocyanin coloration of axis and Crops No. of Var 
notified by the 
center Since 
1966 No. of Var 
notified by the 
center Since 
1999 No. of 
applications 
filed    Extant  
Notified New 
VCK Certificates 
issued 
Mango  02   02  
Annual Report 2021 -22 162 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 branches was strong in most of the accessions. It was found to be weak in Mosambika aam and 
Muzu and strong in Kawa Pasand, Morish Badam and Lalbadam.   
 
Quality Traits 
 Ten mango varieties from DUS plot were characterized (Leaf, Inflorescence and fruit) based 
on DUS mango guidelines (Table -1&2). 
 The maximum fruit length was recorded in the variety Tajmahal (7.67 cm) whereas the 
minimum fruit length was recorded in the variety Muzu (4.60 cm).  
 Total soluble solids ranged from 10.5 to 21.66 0 Brix. The highest value was recorded by the 
variety Manjbe Pasand (21.66 0Brix) and lowest value was recorded in the variety Cavery 
(10.5 0 Brix).  
Table 3.60: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops New  VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries 3rd year  
entries  
Mango 15 10 5  30  
 
 Table 3.61: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Mango 30 Yes 
 
3.1.45.  DUS TESTING CENTRES (TROPICAL SUGARCANE VARIETIES)    
 
ICAR-SUGARCANE BREEDING INSTITUTE, COIMBATORE (LEAD CENTRE) 
ICAR-SUGARCANE BREEDING INSTITUTE, RESEARCH CENTRE, AGALI  
(COLLABORATING CENTRE) 
 
Field maintenance of Reference varieties: 
During the year 2021-22 two hundred and thirty three reference varieties (RV) of tropical sugarcane 
varieties are being maintained in field at Lead Centre (ICAR –  SBI, Coimbatore) and Co-Operating 
Centre (Agali Centre, Kerala). 
Annual Report 2021 -22 163 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
At lead Centre the reference varieties were planted in field on 01.03.2021 in two rows with a plo t size 
of 6m length x 0.9 m spacing between rows. The crop was harvested during March 2022 an d 
replanting was done immediately. 
 
At Co-Operating centre (Agali Centre, Kerala) settlings of the reference varieties were raised in poly 
bags and were transplanted in the main field on 15-16th February 2021. Each entry was planted in two 
rows (6 m long) and row to row distance was 0.9 m. Re-planting was done on 11.2.2022 and crop was 
harvested on 15.3.2022. 
 
The cultural practices were followed in both centres as recommended by the ICAR-SBI to raise a 
disease free crop. 
 
Recording of DUS data for 189 reference varieties have already been completed (during 2018-19 
season) and data for the newly included 45 reference varieties has been taken during this season 
(2021-22) 
 
Multiplication of seed cane of candidate varieties: 
Two new varieties (NV) namely, CoA 14321, CoA 14323 and one extant variety (EV) CoM 0265 
received for multiplication and further DUS test at both Coimbatore and Agali Centre. 
 
Conduct of DUS test: 
 
DUS test for three n ew varieties namely, Co 09004, Co 11015 and Co 10026 were carried out during 
2021-22 season at both Coimbatore and Agali Centres. 
First year DUS test for two new varieties namely Co 11015 and Co 10026 and its closely resembling 
RV’s (Co 85002, Co 85019 for Co 11015 and CoN 95132, Co 7508 for Co 10026) were done 
both at Coimbatore and Agali Centres. 
 
Second year DUS test for the candidate variety Co 09004 and its RV (CoV 89101, CoN 95132, Co 
7717 along with zonal standards Co 86032 and CoC 671) was completed during this crop season 
(2021-22). 
 
Settling of varieties of both the trials along with closely resembling RV’s were raised in polypags 
during 3rd week of January 2021 at both the centres. 
 
About 40 seedlings of the all DUS testing NV and its RV were transplanted in 4 row plots (4 rows per 
variety x 6 m long row x 10 settlings per row x 0.9 m between rows) at Coimbatore during 1st March 
2021 and at Agali Centre during 10th March 2021. Each varie ty was planted in two replications. 
Observations of 27 DUS traits were recorded data of both Lead and Collaborating Centres.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 164 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.46.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR SUGARCANE (SUBTROPICAL SUGARCANE 
VARIETIES)  
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SUGARCANE RESEARCH, LUCKNOW   
It is the lead centre 
 Maintenance of reference collection of sugarcane varieties: One hundred and sixty seven 
reference varieties of sugarcane planted in DUS field for maintenance during spring season of 
2021-22 were maintained. This reference collection includes all the identified, released and 
notified varieties from CVRC, varieties released from states and clones from Advanced 
Varietal Trials of AICRP(S) available with different research organization working on 
sugarcane. DUS characters were recorded on more than 100 varieties in reference collection as 
per the DUS Testing guidelines.  
 
 DUS Testing Trial: The status of DUS Testing during 2021-22 was as below:  
Farmer’s Variety: 
1. Pursa (REG/2017/1416): As reported in Annual Report 2019-20, two sets of planting 
material were received in different dates. The crop from both the seed materials was 
planted separately in field during February, 2020 for observation during 2020-21 crop 
season. It was observed that the variety is susceptible to wilt and the survival is poor, 
indicating that it might be some old advanced line of sugarcane in possession of the 
farmer. 
2. Paseri (REG/2016/929): The DUS Data submitted during 2020-21. 
 
New Variety: 
1. Three newly released sugarcane varieties viz. CoLk 11203, CoLk 11206 and Co 12029 
were planted for DUS Testing during 2020-21 crop season. First year Data were recorded 
as per schedule and the varieties were again planted for second year trial during 2021-22 
crop season. The Final Data is under tabulation for submission.  
2. The DUS Testing Trial (1st Year) has been planted in the month of February, 2022 for 
newly released sugarcane varieties viz. Co 13035, CoLk 12207 and CoLk 12209.  
 
ICAR- SUGARCANE BREEDING INSTITUTE, REGIONAL CENTRE, KARNAL  
 
It is collaborating centre for Subtropical Sugarcane varieties 
 
Maintenance of reference varieties (RV) of sugarcane : A total of 167 sub-tropical 
sugarcane reference varieties were maintained in field under the disease free conditions in a 
plot of size 6m L x 0.9 m spacing between rows x 2 R per RV at ICAR-Sugarcane Breeding 
Annual Report 2021 -22 165 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Institute-Regional Centre, Karnal. Verification of DUS descriptors of reference varieties were 
undertaken as part of DUS characterization of the reference varieties.  
 
The following category DUS reference varieties are being maintained at the centre: 
BO series-17 varieties; CoP series-7; CoB series-1; CoBln series 8; CoH series 12; CoJ series 
5; CoPb series4; CoLk series 9; CoPant series 9; CoS series 50; CoSe series 14; CoPk 1; UP 
series 6 varieties, Co varieties 23. 
Re-characterization of Reference Varieties : DUS traits of 167 RV maintained at ICAR-
SBIRC, Karnal were verified /re-characterized during 2021-22 and the database of all the 
verified DUS reference varieties is being submitted to the PPVFR Authority.  
  
DUS testing for New Sugarcane Variety:  Second year DUS test for one new sugarcane 
varieties viz., Co 12029 was conducted at ICAR-SBI Regional Centre, Karnal along with 
reference varieties (Co 05011 and CoS 97264). A total of one hundred and sixty settlings 
derived from single bud setts of each varieties, were transplanted into RBD design with two 
replications in the DUS testing field. The plot size of 4 Rows x 6 m length x 0.9 m row to row 
spacing was maintained. Observations on twenty seven morphological traits were recorded 
from the candidate as well as reference varieties. The result of 2nd year trial shows that the 
candidate varietie Co 12029 was distinct from each other as well as from the reference 
varieties and the population of these varieties was uniform in both the years. The claimed 
/essential characters recorded from these entries had shown stable performance in second year 
as well. 
First year DUS testing of CoLk 11203 and CoLk 11206 and second year DUS testing of Co 
12029 was completed as per the DUS testing guidelines of PPVFR authority. DUS results 
indicates that the population of CoLk 11206 and CoLk 11203 was uniform during the first 
year trial.   
  
Field view of DUS testing of candidate varieties of sugarcane  at ICAR-SBI Regional Centre, 
Karnal during 2021 -22 crop season 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 166 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.47.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR COCONUT 
 
ICAR-CPCRI, KASARAGOD  
 
IT is the lead centre for Coconut DUS testing  during the year 2021-22 third year growth 
measurements were recorded in candidate variety (REG/2015/415) at the DUS centre. Higher palm height, 
longer petiole and leaves were recorded in candidate variety as compared to reference varieties. 
During current year, flower initiation was observed in four palms out of the twelve palms planted in 
the candidate variety, amounting to 33% flowering of palms in the candidate variety. Inflorescence 
characteristics were recorded during September- November as mentioned in the DUS test guidelines 
for coconut. Higher inflorescence length, medium stalk girth,  medium number of spikelets and 
female flowers, medium duration of female phase, absence of intra spadix overlapping was observed 
under  DUS testing of candidate variety and was different  from the  claimed characters by the 
applicant. On site recording of data of the farmer’s variety (Reg/2014/1949) was initiated in the 
variety Edava long fibre coconut from Thiruvanthapuram.  DUS table of characteristics was recorded 
from a total of ten mother palms from five farmers plot viz:, S. Sreekumar, Usha Kumari, Rajendran, 
Prasad Kappil, Prasanna Kumar, Mohan at Kappil, Edava panchayath, in consultation with Mr. S 
Sreekumar. Due to non availability of one year old seedlings and juvenile palms of candidate variety, 
Inflorescence characteristics and leaf characters were recorded from the adult mother palms of the 
candidate variety. Seven month old tender nuts were harvested from the mother palms and tender nut 
parameters were recorded.  Mature fruits was harvested and studied for recording fruit characters. 
Data generated from mother palms of this candidate variety. Documentation of data from more 
mother palms is to be undertaken and this work is getting delayed, due to poor response from the 
applicant.  
 
 Growth characters were recorded in field planted extant/reference/example varieties of coconut and 
data on fruit component traits and tender nut characters were studied for generation of 
characterization data and refining of descriptor traits for DUS testing. Significantly  higher trunk 
length, leaf length, leaflet length and leaf production were observed in Chandra Kalpa under 4m x 
4m spacing   whereas higher trunk length and broader leaflet was observed in Kalpa Dhenu while  
longer leaflet was recorded in Kalpa Pratibha under  6m x 6m spacing. Higher fruit yield was 
recorded from 6m x 6m as spacing compared to 4m x 4m spacing. Average fruit yield ranged 
from 105 nuts/palm/year (Chandra Sankara) to 77 nuts/palm/year (Kalpa Dhenu) in field planted 
released/ extant/ reference coconut varieties, under 6m x 6m spacing, while it ranged from 83 
nuts/palm/year (Chandra Sankara) to 42 nuts/palm/year (Kalpa Dhenu)  under 4m x 4m spacing . 
Fruits were utilized for generating seedlings and fruit trait studies. 
 
 Twenty seed nuts each were selected and sown in poly bag for generating seedlings of   
reference/released/extant varieties viz:, Chowghat Orange Dwarf, West Coast Tall, Chowghat 
Green Dwarf, Malayan Yellow Dwarf, Malayan Orange Dwarf, Gangabondam Green Dwarf, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 167 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Kalparaksha, Kalpa Dhenu, Kalpa Pratibha, Kalpa Mitra, Chandra Kalpa, Kera Chandra, Tiptur 
Tall, San Ramon Tall, Spicata Tall, Laccadive Micro Tall, Chandra Sankara, Kera Sankara for 
meeting requirements of DUS testing. 
 
Table 3.62: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22:  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries 3rd 
year  
entries  
COCONUT  - - 1 - - - 
 
Table 3.63: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  No of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
COCONUT  14 
 
 
3.1.48.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR DATEPALM 
 
ICAR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR ARID HORTICULTURE, BIKANER, RAJASTHAN 
During the reporting period 2021-22 conservation and maintenance of forty two date palm 
varieties/genotypes was carried out. The thirty eight genotypes of date palm were evaluated for 
morphological, yield, fruiting, and quality attributing characters. The observation of plant 
morphological characters (leaf length, leaflet length & width, number of thorns per rachis, inter thorn 
distance, thorn length and leaf folding angle), yield attributing characters (number of bunches per 
plant, stalk length, bunch length, number of strands per bunch, strand length, number of fruits per 
strands at pea stage, fruits drops per strands, number of harvested fruits per strands, fruit set & drop 
per cent), fruiting characters ( bunch weight, fruit weight, fruit length & width, stone weight, pulp 
weight, pulp stone ratio, stone length & width, pulp thickness), quality characters    (fruit colour and 
TSS) and yield respectively were recorded & exhibited large variation in among the parameters. The 
maximum leaf length in Sabiah (353 cm) and minimum in Hillali (160 cm), maximum leaf width in 
Hatemi (3.67 cm) and minimum Nagal Hillali (1.77 cm), maximum leaf length in Khasab (51.7 cm) 
and minimum in Binte-A-Isha (29.7 cm), maximum leaflet width in Nagal Hillali (3.7 cm) and 
minimum in Hatemi (1.8 cm), maximum number of thorns per rachis in Umshok (34.3) and minimum 
in Muscut (8), maximum thorn length in Gijaj (14.7 cm) and minimum in Medini (6.1 cm), Maximum 
thorn width in Gijaj (8 mm) and minimum in Hamara (0.4 cm), maximum inter thorn distance in 
Dayari (10.5 cm) and minimum in Hamara (3.2 cm) and leaf folding angle narrow, medium and wide 
was recorded in among the genotypes. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 168 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
The yield attributing characters of the various genotypes were evaluated and recorded harvesting of 
fruit starts from last week of June (Dhamas) to September (rain tolerant genotypes).The maximum 
number of bunches in genotype in Sewi (15) and minimum number in Sakloti (4), maximum stalk 
length in Sabiah (80 cm) and minimum in Gulchati (14.3 cm), maximum bunch length in Hayani (39 
cm) and minimum in Sakloti (6.7 cm), maximum number of strands per bunch in Muscut (58.3 cm) 
and minimum in Sakloti (6.7), maximum strand length in Sewi (61 cm) and minimum in Zaglool 
(22.2 cm), maximum number of fruit per strands  at pea formation stage in Khadrawy (40) and 
minimum in Muscut (15) minimum number of fruits drop in Zahidi (2.2) and maximum number of 
fruit drop in Khadrawy (25), maximum number of harvested fruit in Zahidi ( 20.7) and minimum 
number in Gulchati (3.7), the maximum number of fruit drop per cent in Gulchati (80.8 %) and 
minimum fruit drop per cent in Zahidi (9.1 %) and maximum fruit set per cent was recorded in  Zahidi 
and minimum fruit set per cent was recorded  in Gulchati (19.2 %) genotypes. 
   
The fruiting characters of date palm genotypes are recorded and found the maximum bunch weight 
was in Hayani (8.2 kg) and minimum in Gijaj (1.5 kg), maximum fruit weight in Medjool (17 gm) and 
minimum in Tayer (3.3 gm), maximum fruit length in Dhamas (45.7 mm) and minimum in Javantri 
(21mm), maximum fruit width in Medjool (26 mm) and minimum in Tayer (15 mm), maximum stone 
weight in Dayari (2.1 gm) and minimum in Tayer (0.7 gm), maximum pulp weight in Medjool (16 
gm) and minimum in Dayari (1.6 gm), maximum pulp stone ratio in Medjool (11.8) and minimum in 
Dayari (0.8), maximum stone length in Dhamas (31.2 mm) and minimum in Tayer ( 16.9 mm), 
maximum stone width in Javantri (11.4 mm) and minimum in Chichap (7.6 mm) and maximum pulp 
thickness in Medjool (9.17 mm)  and  minimum Tayer (2.77mm),  fruit colour yellow, red, green 
yellow, dark red, light yellow, orange yellow, greenish red, maximum fruit yield per plant in Hayani 
(86.2 kg ) and minimum  in Zaglool (8.1 kg) and maximum TSS was  in Medjool (52.6 0Brix)and 
minimum was recorded in Zaglool (19.6 0Brix). 

Annual Report 2021 -22 169 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
   
  
Fruit laden palms of Zahidi and Khuneizi varieties of Date palm 
 
3.1.49.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR POMEGRANATE 
 
ICAR-NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE ON POMEGRANATE, SOLAPUR 
On site DUS characterization of farmer variety namely Sharad king‟ was carried out in 2021-22 at 
Tupewadi (V), Aurangabad (D), Maharashtra and it was compared with the reference variety 
(Bhagawa) for 36 DUS characters. The tested candidate variety was found to have distinctive 
characteristic features for petal length (long), fruit length (long), fruit shape, Aril length (short) and 
fruit maturity (medium) in comparison to reference variety (medium, medium, medium, and late 
maturity) submitted the consolidated report of two new pomegranate varieties (NRCP H-4 and NRCP 
H-14) whose on-site DUS testing was completed during 2019-20 and 2020-21.The two years 
consolidated report of the two hybrid varieties (NRCP H-4 and NRCP H-14) has showed that the 
NRCP H-14 is having vigorous plant growth habit with yellow with red tinge fruits, pink very sweet 
arils and hard seeds. While, NRCP H-4 also observed to be a vigorous hybrid variety whose fruit rind 
is yellow with red tinge colored, arils are pink with acidic juice embedded with hard seeds. All these 
are medium duration varieties takes about 140-165 days to mature after anthesis started to work on 
identification of polymorphic SSR markers for DUS testing in pomegranate. In the preliminary study, 
48 diverse pomegranate genotypes consist of both wild and cultivated types were assessed by using 
30 SSR markers. All the 48 genotypes genotypic data was scored and analyzed. The number of alleles 
of loci was varied from 2 to 4. Total of 40 alleles were found in the studied genotypes. DARwin 
ver.2.0 was used to analyse the data. Maximum genetic dissimilarity (0.53) was observed between IC-

Annual Report 2021 -22 170 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 318712 and IC-318718 as well as IC-318712 and Acc-08 collection. The polymorphic information 
content ranged from 0.12 to 8.69 with an average of 0.53. The clustering analysis was well supported 
by principle component analysis (PCA). The first two axis of PCA with positive two values 0.0197 
and 0.0122 accounted for 46.71% of the total variation. The first axis has accounted 28.76%, whereas 
second axis covered 17.95% of variance. The PgSSR 54, 57 and 32 were found to be highly 
polymorphic with given set of markers, which can be used for validating in selected reference 
varieties and DUS testing in candidate varieties. 
 
DUS characteristic features of farmer variety (“Sharad King”) 
 
 
3.1.50.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR MELIA DUBIA  
 
INSTITUTE OF FOREST GENETIC AND TREE BREEDING (IFGTB), COIMBATORE . 
 
Coimbatore is ma intaining the already established germplasm bank at IFGTB, Recording 
observations in the germplasm bank and propagation of the varieties at the DUS centre. 
Maintaining the clones for further trials to observe changes in stability.  
Maintenance of DUS reference collections established in March 2020 at Panampally Research 
Station, Recording observations in field germplasm.  
 
Juvenile characters of Melia dubia were observed in 6-month-old IFGTB clones. Leaf 
waxiness and Rachis anthocyanin colouration, the dimorphic characters vary between clones and 
individual plants.  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 171 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Distribution of qualitative leaf traits among the clones is presented. 
 
 
 
 
3.1.51.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR NEEM, KARANJ AND JATROPHA 
 
FOREST COLLEGE AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE, TNAU, METTUPALAYAM  
During the year 2021 -22 validation of 15 DUS descriptors out of 19 descriptors for the 32 neem 
reference collection was completed and documented.  
 
Validation of 11 DUS descriptors out of 23 descriptors for the 33 Pungam reference collections was 
completed and documented.  
 
The biometric observation in terms of height, girth and number of branches in the 32 neem reference 
collection and 33 Karanj reference collections are recorded periodically.  
 
1 No. of reference varieties maintained at DUS centre  Neem – 32 reference collection  
Karanj – 33 reference collection  
Whether replicated data of reference varieties submitted 
to the authorit y Submitted along with the report  
 
2 Technical man -power engaged in the DUS project  Senior Research Fellow  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 172 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 DUS field – Neem reference collection                             DUS field - Karanj reference collection   
                                      
     
3.1.52.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR JASMINE  
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEACH, HESARAGHATTA, 
BANGALORE AS LEAD CENTRE 
 
During the year varieties under maintenance breeding were characterized in different commercially 
cultivated Jasminum  spp. are J.sambac (24nos.), J. auriculatum  (6 nos.), J. multiflorum  (3 nos.) and 
J.grandiflorum  (4 nos.) and in six other lesser-known  Jasminum species. 
 
All the genotypes under maintenance breeding were multiplied and planted in a newly 
established field gene bank as the plants in the existing one are > 10 years old and past their 
productive life span. 
 
Table 3.64: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Crop/ species  Name or number of varieties 
under maintenance breeding in 
2021-22 
Jasminum auriculatum  6 
J.sambac  24 
J.multiflorum  3 
J.grandiflorum  4 
 
In addition to the commercial species of Jasminum , six other lesser-known species ( Jasminum 
rigidum, Jasminum nitidum, Jasminum flexile, Jasminum malabaricum, Jasminum humile and 
Jasminum primulinum ) are being maintained in the field gene bank and characterized. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 173 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
  Data submission (Maintenance Breeding):  
 
Jasminum sambac , Jasminum auriculatum, Jasminum multiflorum , Jasminum grandiflorum 
genotypes and other lesser-known species ( Jasminum rigidum, Jasminum nitidum, Jasminum flexile, 
Jasminum malabaricum, were evaluated based on the morphological characteristics and their 
corresponding states and the data has been submitted. 
 
 
3.1.53.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR BOUGAINVILLEA, CANNA AND GLADILOUS  
 
INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, NEW DELHI IS THE LEAD 
CENTRE FOR DUS TESTING OF BOUGAINVILLEA 
 
Germplasm maintenance of reference varieties.  
 
Multiplication  and Maintenance of varieties and development of multigrafted bougainvillea and their 
multiplication. Experiment has been carried out on physical and chemical mutation for the 
development of bougainvillea varieties for novel colour. Multiplication of mutants emerged from 
spontaneous mutation.  
 
Table 3.65: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
S. N. Cultivar S. N. Cultivars  S. N. Cultivars  
1 Abraham Kavoor  35 Hawaiine White  68 Philomina  
2 Alick Lancaster  36 IsacbeleGreensmith  69 Pink Beauty  
3 Aruna 37 Jawaharlal Nehru  70 PixiVariegata  
4 B T Red 38 Jayalakshmi  71 Poultoni 
5 Bangalore Variegata  39 Jubille 72 Poultoni Special  
6 Begum Sikander  40 Killie Campbell  73 Quen Elizabeth  
7 Blondie 41 Krumbigel  74 R S Bhatt  
8 Cascade 42 Lady Hope  75 Radha 
9 Chandrabieri  43 Lady Hudson  76 Red Septeber  
10 Cherry Blossom  44 Lady Mary Baring 77 Refulgens  
11 Chitra 45 Lady Richards  78 Rose Ville Delight  
12 Coleoptera  46 Lakshmi 79 RoseaFuschia  
13 Deep Red  47 Los Banos Beauty  80 Sanderiana  
14 Dr. B. P. Pal  48 Los BanosVariagata  81 Sensation  
15 Dr.Bhabha  49 Los BanosVariagata Jayanti  82 Shubhra 
16 Dr. H. B. Singh  50 Louis Wathen  83 Singpore Red  
17 Dr. H. C. Buck  51 Mahara 84 Sofia Mutant  
18 Dr.Hadu 52 Mahatma Gandhi  85 Sonnet 
19 Dr.Homibhabha  53 Manohar Chandra  86 Spectable  
20 Dr. P.V. Sane  54 Mary Palmer Special  87 Splendens  
21 Dr. R. R. Pal  55 Mataji Agnihotri  88 Spring Festival  
22 Dr. Rao 56 Meera 89 Stanza 
23 Dream 57 Mrs. Backery  90 Summer Time  
24 Elizabeth Angus  58 Mrs. Butt  91 Superba 
Annual Report 2021 -22 174 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 25 Fantacy 59 Mrs. Frasser  92 Sweet Heart  
26 Filoman 60 Mrs. McClean  93 Swetha 
27 Flame 61 Padmi 94 Tetra Mrs. McClean  
28 Gangaswamy  62 Palekar 95 Thimma 
29 Garnet Glory  63 Pallavi 96 Tomato Red  
30 Glabra 64 Partha 97 Torch Glow  
31 Glady‟sHeburn  65 Parthasarthy  98 Versicolour  
32 Gloriosus  66 Perfusion  99 Vishaka 
33 Golden Glow  67 Phillips 100 Zakiriana  
34 Gopal  
 
 
CSIR-NATIONAL BOTANICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, LUCKNOW   
 
It is the Collaborating centre  
 
A. Bougainvillea  
 
Total 184 varieties were maintained in the Germplasm collection as Reference Varieties. No 
candidate varieties were received. Measurements of morphological characters were done based 
on DUS Test guidelines, characters such as stem colour, thorn size, shape, leaf shape, size, bract 
colour, flower size and colour etc, of selected varieties were recorded, analysed and 
photographed at DUS Test germplasm collection facility for identifying character and variations 
occurred within the varieties. Characterization of the following references varieties viz., 
Vishakha Variegata, Lady Hudson of Ceylon, Pixie Variegata, Aruna, Poultoni Special, 
Abhimanyu, Asia, B.T Red, Jaya, Shubhra were done. 
  
B. Gladiolus  
 
Total 69 exotic cultivars and 46 Indian bred cultivars were maintained as reference varieties 
while no candidate varieties were received. Measurements of morphological characters were 
done based on DUS Test guidelines, characters such as height, leaf length, width, colour, 
curvature, spike, rachis length, number of flowers / spike, arrangement of flowers, shape, size, 
attitude, colour, etc, of 70 gladiolus varieties were recorded, analysed and photographed at DUS 
Test germplasm collection facility, to collect the information about distinct features of these 
varieties and use it as reference varieties for protection of other new varieties under PPVFR Act, 
2001.Characterization of the following varieties viz., Sunayna, Punjab Delight, Apollo, 
Fortuna, American Beauty Pink, Palampur Pride, Jwala, Fidelio, Zeus, Punjab Don were 
documented . 
 
C. Canna  
 
The germplasm (52 Canna varieties and five Canna species) was conserved in field beds (Area 
3000 m2) designated for the DUS Test Centre by providing regular cultural practices round the 
year. Measurements of morphological characters were done based on DUS Test guidelines, 
characters such as stem diameter, shape, length, leaf size, number, shape, colour, rhizome colour, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 175 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 diameter, number of eyes, inflorescence length, number of flowers, flower size, calyx size, 
corolla size shape, colour, staminode size, shape, colour, labellum size, shape, colour, fertile 
stamen size, colour, were recorded, analysed and photographed at DUS Test germplasm 
collection facility. Characterization of the following varieties viz., Pink Sunrise, Cleopatra, 
Wyoming, Red Sindoor, Agni Shikha were documented.    
 
 
     
 
 
3.1.54.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR SPICES 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE  OF SPICES RESEARCH  KOZHIKODE, KERALA  
 
It is the nodal DUS testing centre for Spices, Kozhikode, Kerala  
Major programs carried out during the year by the DUS centre was the maintenance of example 
varieties of black pepper, small cardamom, ginger and turmeric ; multiplication of ginger and turmeric 
provided by farmers for DUS testing. DUS testing completed for 19 turmeric varieties which include 

Annual Report 2021 -22 176 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 14 farmers’ varieties and 4 varieties of common knowledge and one new variety. DUS testing 
completed for 7  ginger varieties which include 4  farmers’ varieties and 3  varieties of common 
knowledge. On site preliminary observation of 3 black pepper and 6 small cardamom varieties were 
undertaken and corresponding reference verities were identified based on essential characteristics. 
Ongoing 2 ginger and 4 turmeric farmer varieties are under DUS testing. 
At presently the authority issued certificate for; 
8 Black pepper varieties (4 Farmer &4 VCK) 
9 Small cardamom varieties (6 Farmer, 2 VCK & 1 Extant) 
5 Turmeric varieties (1 New &4 Extant) 
Other Events:- 
 Characterization of candidate varieties of black pepper, ginger, cardamom and turmeric were 
carried out and submitted the reports  
 In order to undertake DUS testing for ginger planted 23 reference varieties  and 9 farmers 
varieties at ICAR-IISR, Kozhikode 
 In turmeric, planted 39 reference varieties, 13 farmers varieties and 17 test completed varieties 
at ICAR-IISR, Kozhikode. 
 One set of these varieties were send to alternative testing centre for DUS at ICAR Research 
complex for NEH Region, Barapani 
 
 
3.1.55.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR CHRYSANTHEMUM  
 
 ICAR- INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, NEW DELHI   
 
It is the lead centre   
During the year 2021-22 total 145 reference varieties are maintened.  
 
Table 3.66: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2017 -18 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Chrysanthemum 
morifoliun  145 DUS data of 25 varieties  
 
Table 3.67: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
Annual Report 2021 -22 177 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chrysanthemum  02 Nos.    - 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEACH, HESARAGHATTA LAKE 
POST, BENGALURU  
  
It is collaborating centre for DUS testing of Chrysanthemum varieties 
During the year 2021-22 total of 90 genotypes were characterized for 77 traits as per DUS test 
guidelines.   
 
Two Chrysanthemum candidate varieties namely NBRI-Pukhaj and NBRI-Himjyoti received for DUS 
testing. These varieties were multiplied through terminal cuttings and planted in main plot. The crop 
is in vegetative phase and is under observation.  
 
    Table 3.68: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year entries  
Chrysanthemum  02 Nos. from 
CSIR-NBRI, 
Lucknow - - - - 
 
Table 3.69: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 90 genotypes 
 
Mandated Crop 
species Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data submission  
(Maintenance breeding) Yes/No 
Chrysanthemum  90 named varieties  Yes 
 
 
3.1.56.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR MARIGOLD 
 
ICAR-INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, NEW DELHI  
 
It is the Lead centre for DUS testing of marigold varieties . 
 
  In this year 2021-22, 62 genotypes including 23 reference varieties of marigold were maintained 
well following standard package of practice necessary for marigold crp. These varieties were 
propagated in the nursey and transplanted in the main filed at the research farm of lead centre IARI, 
New Delhi. The sexually propagated reference varieties were subjected for selfing after first flowering 
after roughing out undesired plants to maintain purity of genotype. In addition one candidate variety 
Annual Report 2021 -22 178 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 (farmer variety) i.e. trail code 02880/4169 was also grown along with reference varieties for DUS 
testing.  
 
Table 3.70: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Crops Name or No of varieties under maintenance 
breeding in 2020 -21 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breedin g) 
Yes/No 
Marigold 34 IARI, New Delhi (released varieties/selection)  
09 IIHR, Bangalore(released varieties/selection)  
02 CCS HAU, Hisar (released varieties)  
02 BCKV, Kalyani (released varieties)  
15 other (released varieties)  
Total=62 Yes 
 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, BANGALORE   
IT is the collaborating centre In 2021-22  DUS data recording was done for a total of 22 varieties of 
which 12 are example varieties and remaining 10 were reference varieties.  
 
Table 3.71: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22:  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
Marigold      
1 02880/4169  - -   
 
Table 3.72: Details of varieties being maintained and DUS characters recorded in 2021-
22   
  Total 
no. Example No. and Name  Reference no.& Name  
A Public Sector varieties   
1 IARI    
a African 5 4 1 
   IARI/AP/W -4, PUSA NARANGI, 
PUSA BASANTI, IARI/AP/W -8 PUSA BAHAR  
     
b French 2 1 1 
Annual Report 2021 -22 179 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Marigold 
   PUSA ARPITTA  PUSA DEEP  
2 IIHR    
a African 10 6 4 
   Arka Agni, IIHRMYs -3, Arka 
Bangara-2 (ArkaAlankara as 
published in Guideline), IIHRMO -
3, IIHRMy -4, IIHRMy -5 ArkaShubha ,ArkaVibha, 
ArkaAbhi, ArkaBhanu  
     
b French 
Marigold 3 3  
   ArkaMadhu (IIHRFM -1 as 
jpublished in guideline), ArkaPari, 
IIHRMO-4  
B Other than public Sector(private sector)  
a Afric
an 8  8 
    Helius , Helium, Super Orange, T.N 
Ball, Bali orange, F.F. BIOWORKS, 
Katraphyta chem., OM Green tech 
     
b Fren
ch 
Mari
gold 7  7 
    Orange Winner , Gulzafri Yellow, 
Valencia Yellow, Gulzafri Orange, 
Bolero Red, Queen Sophia, Dainty 
Marietta 
     
 Total 38   
 
 
Candidate variety under  DUS testing 

Annual Report 2021 -22 180 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.57.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR ORCHIDS  
 
ICAR-NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE  FOR ORCHIDS, PAKYONG, SIKKIM    
 
It identified four (4) traits of farmers varieties  namely Plant height & Inflorescence no. of plant, 
nature of shoot, flower width, lip width,  lobation and  predominant colour in Dendrobium 
transparens ;  Nature of shoot, Internode numbers, Inflorescence number /plant and flower 
number/inflorescence, Lip lobation,  predominant colour, colour pattern in Dendrobium devonianum ; 
Nature of shoot, inflorescence no. per plant, and flower number/inflorescence, Inflorescence length, 
flower width, Lip lobation & predominant colour in Dendrobium chrysanthum  and   Pseudobulb 
shape  and Number of flowers per inflorescence and pedicel length in Cymbidium ensifolium spp. 
haematodes through PPV & FRA, NASC Complex, New Delhi. 
 
Table 3.73: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st 
year 
entrie
s 2nd 
year  
entrie
s  
1. Cymbidium     Cym. Ensifolium sp. 
Haematodes  
Cym. eburneum  
  
2. Dendrobium     Den. devonianum, 
Den. chrysanthum, 
Den. aphyllum, Den. 
transparens   
 
Table 3.64: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Cymbidium  30 Yes 
Dendrobium  12 Yes 
Vanda 10 Yes 
Phalaenopsis  10 Yes 
Cattleya 9 Yes 
Annual Report 2021 -22 181 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Oncidium 8 Yes 
Paphiopedilum  10 Yes 
Mokara 7 Yes 
 
 
3.1.58.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR ROSE 
 
ICAR- INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, BANGALORE  
It is the lead centre 
During the year 2021-22 varieties under maintenance/characterized:   174 varieties are being 
maintained in field and around 15 are maintained naturally ventilated polyhouse.  Digital  repository 
all the varieties for 60 characters are being built that includes data as well as pictures. 
Table 3.65: List of rose varieties maintained as example and reference varieties 
 No  Name  
 
Example 
varieties   
20  
Dr. G.S.Randhawa, Ahalya, Abhisarika, Arunima, Dr.B.P.Pal, Gladiator, Iceberg, 
M.S.Randhawa, Pusa Prema, Pusa Sonora, Pusa Baramasi, Pusa Vihangana, 
Queen Elizabeth, Rakthima, Kiss of Fire, Mrinalini, Pusa Gaurav, Arjun, Kiran, 
Anurag 
Reference 
varieties   
148  
Existing 
Arka Pride, Nobless, Tiniki, First Red, Grand Gala, Tajmahal, Royal Claus, 
Trapical Amazon, Bonhair, Gold Strike, White Avalanchi, Sakeera, Bugathi, 
Preyasi, Srinivasa, Neela, Vaishnavi, Dream cloud, Granada, Brenessa, Maria 
Callas, Timeless, Happiness, Ca ptain Harry Stebbings, Babylon, , Christian Dior, 
Tempo, Prestine, Hakuun, John F. Kennedy, Anhur bell, Alliance, Marine Dowell, 
Angkar, Rosemary Harkness, Atoll, Catalonia, Orange Flame, American Heritage, 
Meduse, Apricot Spice, Marry Kittil, Friendship, Festival Fanfare, Duke of 
181indsor, Night ‘N’ Day, Strawberry Ice, Lili Marlene, Pestel Delight, Paul 
shirville, Sandringham Centenary, Blue Ocean, Flirtacious, Durgapur Jubilee, 
Bhavani, Paradise, Only You, Scentimental, Vetter Tag, Via Mala, Kasturi 
Rangan, Aishwarya, Girija, Tipu’s Flame, Rose Anil, Queen Aishwarya, The 
Master, Berries N Cream, Easy Going, CLG Ole, CLG Paradise, Knockout, Care 
Free Beauty, Cherry Parafait, Doreys Testermann, Diplomat, Sophia Larance, 
Raja Surender Singh Of Nalagarh, Rango li, Don Don, Vasavi, Agnihotri, 
Dr.Khane, Folklore, Red Racker, Violin D’Ingress, White Magic, Ico Delight, 
Otta the Blue, Prince Claus, Precious Platinum, Eterna, Blue Delight, Brass Band, 
General Vidhaya, Pusa Komala, Lady X, Maink, Moliter, Narthaki, Pa pagene, 
Pink Panther, Margaret Of England, Khushali, Ratan, Sarvesh, Red Cascade, 
White Miniature, Minister, Pink Bunch, Red Bunch, Arka Savi, Shanthi, Kulchi 
Annual Report 2021 -22 182 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Red, Ruby Pink, Single Orange, Chirshma, Sopha Gold, Yellow Babe, Merrable, 
Rubycon, Orange Babe,  Five Star, Arka Parimala, Arka Sukanya, Okla Homa, 
American Home, Red Chief, Eiffel Tower, Panner Rose, Pushkar Pink, Pushkar 
Red, Arka Sharmeeli, Arka Kinnari, Arka Sinchana  
Added in 21 -22 
Nurjahan, Ranisaheb, Caprice de Milland, Edwade Rose, Red Rose, S weet 
Fragrance, Fragrant Lace, Atoll, Fancy, Gilli, Mango Yellow, Red Five Star, 
Tomota 
 
DUS 
testing 
completed   
6 Meiflemingue, RUICG1636A (Hotshot), Arka Swadesh, INTERGELAN, 
INTERORLAN, Arka Ivory  
 
 
Table 3.66: Details of source and categories for rose varieties being maintained under DUS 
  No Name 
A Public sector 
varieteis 26  
i) IARI 15  
a Fragrant  1 Anurag 
b Garden 14 Abhisarika, Arjun, Arunima, Dr.B.P.Pal, M.S.Randhawa, Mrinalini, 
Pusa Baramasi, Pusa Gaurav, Pusa Prema, Pusa Sonora, Pusa 
Vihangana, Rakthima, Preyasi, Komala  
c Cut flower  0  
d Loose flower  0  
    
ii
) IIHR 11  
a Fragrant  3 Arka Parimala, Arka Sukanya, Kiran  
b Garden 4 Dr. G.S.Randhawa, Arka Kinnari, Arka Sharmeeli, Arka Sinchana  
c Cut flower  3 Arka Ivory, Arka Pride, Arka Swadesh  
d Loose flower  1 Arka Savi  
B Varieties from Pvt 
Sector 148  
i) Pvt varieties from 
India 25  
a Fragrant  2 Nurjahan, Ranisaheb  
b Garden 23 Ahalya, Agnihotri, Aishwarya, Bhavani, Blue Delight, Blue Ocean, 
Dr.Khane, Girija, Ico Delight, Kasturi Rangan, Khushali, Maink, 
Neela, Raja Surender Singh Of Nalagarh, Rangoli, Ratan, Rose Anil, 
Sarvesh, Srinivasa, The Master, Tipu’s Flame, Vaishnavi, Vasavi  
ii
)  Exotic varieties 
(from breeders 
outside India)  123  
Annual Report 2021 -22 183 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 a Fragrant  11 American Home, Caprice de Milland, Edwade Rose (Coimbature), 
Eiffel Tower, Fragrant Lace, Panner Rose, Pushkar Pink, Pushkar Red, 
Red Chief, Red Rose (Coimbature), Sweet Fragrance  
b Garden 80 Gladiator, Iceberg, Kiss of Fire, Queen Elizabeth, Alliance, American 
Heritage, Angkar, Anhur bell, Apricot Spice, Atoll, Babylon, Berries 
N Cream, Brass Band, Brenessa, Captain Harry Stebbings, Care Free 
Beauty, Catalonia, Cherry Parafait, Christian Dior, CLG Ole, CLG 
Paradise, Diplomat, Don Don, Doreys Testermann, Dream cloud, 
Duke of 183indsor, Durgapur Jubilee, Easy Going, Eterna, Festival 
Fanfare, Flirtacious, Folklore, Friendship, General Vidhaya, Granada, 
Hakuun, Happiness, John F. Kennedy, Knockout, Lady X, Lili 
Marlene, Maria Callas, Marine Dowell, Marry Kittil, Meduse, 
Minister, Moliter, Narthaki, Night ‘N’ Day, Only You, Orange Flame, 
Otta the Blue, Papagene, Paradise, Paul shirville, Pestel Delight, Pink 
Bunch, Pink Panther, Precious Platinum, Prestine, Prince Claus, 
Princess Margaret Of England, Queen Aishwarya, Red Bunch, Red 
Cascade, Red Racker, Rosemary Harkness, Sangai autumn, 
Scentimental, Sophia Larance, Strawberry Ice, Tempo, Timeless, 
Vetter Tag, Via Mala, Violin D’Ingress, White Magic, White 
Miniature, oklahoma  
c Cut flower  14 Bonhair, Bugathi, First Red, Gold Stri ke, Grand Gala, Nobless, Royal 
Claus, Sakeera, Tajmahal, Tiniki, Trapical Amazon, White Avalanchi, 
Meiflemingue, RUICG1636A (Hotshot)  
d Loose flower  18 INTERGELAN, INTERORLAN, Chirshma, Fancy, Five Star, Gilli, 
Kulchi Red, Mango Yellow, Merrable, Orange Babe, Red Five Star, 
Ruby Pink, Rubycon, Shanthi, Single Orange, Sopha Gold, Tomota, 
Yellow Babe  
 
 
Digital respository of rose being built at ICAR-IIHR 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 184 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
ICAR- DIRECTORATE OF FLORICULTURAL RESEARCH, PUNE  
 
It is collaborating centre for DUS testing of Rose varieties 
 
During the year 2021-22 germplasm of 154 varieties consisting of both Exotic and Indigenous 
varieties are being maintained at the centre. During the year 0B new varieties were and 2 wild species 
were collected from different sources. The selected varieties were screened for various traits. DUS 
characterizatton under Pune condition was carried out for 05 varieties in 2021-22 growing season. 
Due to covid-19 pandemic the maintenance of germplasm at field was difficult and due which some 
of the varieties were lost. Centre could take up the capital works (Greenhouse construction) and 
required inputs were procured for making it functional. 
 
          Table 3.67: Varieties under maintainance/184haracterized  : 
 
Mandated Crop 
Species 
 
 Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in2021 -
22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breedi ng) 
Yes/No 
Rose 154 No 
 
 
3.1.59.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR CHINA ASTER  
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEACH, HESARAGHATTA LAKE POST, 
BENGALURU, KARNATAKA  
 
It is the Lead Centre for CHINA ASTER   
 
During the year total of 31 genotypes were characterized as per DUS test guidelines (10 vegetative 
traits and 11 flower traits).   
 
Table 3.68: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 31 genotypes 
 
Mandated Crop 
species Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data submission  
(Maintenance breeding) Yes/No  
China aster 
(Callistephus 
chinensis) 31 named varieties  Yes 
Annual Report 2021 -22 185 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
AICRP ON FLORICULTURE, ZONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH STATION, 
GANESHKHIND, PUNE 
 
It  is the collaborating centre for China aster 
 
During the year 2021-22 below mentioned varieties are maintained at AICRP on Floriculture, 
Zonal Agricultural Research Station, Ganeshkhind, Pune  
 
Table 3.69: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  
Mandated crop species  Name or No of varieties 
under maintenance breeding 
2021-22 Data submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
China Aster  
(reference varieties = 8)  1. Arka Shashank  
2. Arka Pornima  
3. Arka Kamini  
4. Arka Archana  
5. Phule Ganesh Pink  
6. Phule Ganesh Purple  Yes 

Annual Report 2021 -22 186 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 7. Phule Ganesh Violet  
8. Phule Ganesh White  
 
Photographs of reference varieties of aster 
  
Local white  Local Pink  
 
 
             
                
3.1.60.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR OILSEED (CASTOR, SUNFLOWER, SAFFLOWER) 
 
THE ICAR - INDIAN INSTITUTE OF OILSEEDS RESEARCH, HYDERABAD 
It  is the lead centre for testing of three oilseed crops viz., Castor, Sunflower and Safflower.  
Castor 
During 2021-22, Farmer’s variety CDBA-345 (REG/2018/449) was sown for DUS testing in a 
replicated trial with three reference varieties DCS-9, Aruna and Ritesh Redi (DOS 14.07.2021). Seed 
sowing was undertaken in 6 rows of 6 m for each replication. Data has been recorded for 30 DUS 
traits in accordance with the DUS test guidelines. Consolidated DUS testing report of two centres for 
castor Farmer’s variety CDBA-345 (REG/2018/449) along with three reference varieties is under 
compilation. 
 Initial characterization of five reference varieties (ICH-66, GCH-8, ICH-440, DPC-25 and 
ICS-164) was taken up in replicated trial with 5 rows of 6 m for each replication. Data has been 
recorded for 30 DUS traits in accordance with the DUS test guidelinesand data is under compilation. 
Multiplication of reference variety CO-1 and DPC-9 was also undertaken during kharif 2021. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 187 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Sunflower 
 
During 2021-22, one new candidate hybrid 2886/2076 for2ndyear DUS testing with SMG Hybrid 
2886/2076/H/F 1 and two reference hybrids 1/2086/H and 1/2087/H along with national check KBSH-
44were sown in rabi, 2021-22 (DOS 18.11.2021). 
 
The new candidate variety 2886/2076 was sown for2nd year testing in a replicated trial along 
with four reference hybrids 2886/2076/H/F 1 SMG Hybrid, 1/2086/H, 1/2087/H and KBSH-44 as per 
test plot design defined in the guidelines. Data has been recorded for 26DUS traits in accordance with 
the DUS test guidelines and remaining eight post-harvest observations are in progress. 
 
During rabi 2021-22, 14 parental lines of sunflower viz.CMS-10A/B, CMS11A/B, CMS-
17A/B, CMS-38A/B, CMS-67A/B, CMS-104A/B and CMS-234A/B were maintained and multiplied. 
 
Safflower 
 
During rabi 2021-22, ten reference entries of safflower viz. PBNS-86, CG Kusum -1, SSF-12-40, SSF-
13-71, TSF-1, NARI-6, NARI-96, IGKV Kusum, A-1 and PBNS -12 were maintained and multiplied.  
 
Submission of DUS testing reports 
 
Castor  
 
Consolidated DUS testing report for Farmer’s variety Ritesh Redi (REG/2017/2151) along with 
reference varieties Aruna and DCS-9 tested during 2020-21 at 2 centres, ICAR-IIOR, Hyderabad and 
MORS, JAU, Junagadh were submitted on 29.05.2021. 
 
 
Sunflower 
 
Consolidated DUS testing report for one new candidate 2886/2076 along with reference entries 
KBSH-42 and KBSH-44 tested during 2020-21 at 2 centres, ICAR-IIOR, Hyderabad and TNAU, 
Coimbatore and comparative DUS testing report SH1with SH1 SMG and SH2withSH2 SMG were 
also submitted on 04.09.2021.  
 
Safflower 
 
Consolidated DUS testing report for one new candidate 2877/4134 safflower tested for the 2nd year 
during 2020-21 at 2 centres, ICAR-IIOR, Hyderabad and Dr. PDKV, Akola along with reference 
Annual Report 2021 -22 188 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 varieties 2877/4134(m), A-1 and Phule kusumawas submitted on16.12.2021 and 20 plant data was 
also submitted through mail on 16.02.2022. 
 
 
MAIN OILSEEDS RESEARCH STATION, JUNAGADH AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, 
JUNAGADH IS  
It is collaborating centre 
During the current year (Kharif-2022), 1367.8 mm rainfall was received in 47 rainy days. The 
weekly weather and rainfall data are enclosed herewith. The seeds of castor farmers’ variety (CBDA-
345) for DUS testing along with reference varieties (DCS-9, Aruna, Ritesh Redi) were received from 
PPV & FRA, New Delhi. The experiment was sown on 17th August, 2021 as per guideline sent by 
Dr. N. Mukta. The crop was fertilized with dose of 75:50:00 NPK kg/ha. Out of these 37.50: 50:00 
NPK kg/ha was applied as basal on 17/08/2021 and remaining half nitrogen is applied in to two split 
i.e. first split dose of nitrogen was applied on dated 09-09-2021 and second split dose was applied on 
dated 10-10-2021. Harvesting of primary spike was done on 27-12 -2021. 
Expt. DUS-1:  DUS testing of farmers’ variety of castor  
Location: Main oilseed Research Station, JAU, Junagadh 
Season:    Kharif –  2021 Design:   RBD   Date of sowing: 17 -08-2021 
Number of entries: 4(1+3) No. of replications:  3  Row length:   6.00 m     
No. of rows/entry: 6  Spacing:  90 x 60 cm  Plot size:  6.00 m x 5.40 m  
Fertilizer dose:  75: 50: 00 NPK kg/ha Expt. Area:  21.60 m x 21.60 m = 0.0432 ha  
DAP = 4.70 kg, Urea = 5.21 kg 
The observations were recorded on morphological characters viz., Hypocotyl: anthocyanin 
pigmentation, leaf: anthocyanin pigmentation of young emerging leaves, leaf: waxi bloom on upper 
side, leaf: waxi bloom on lower side, stem: waxi bloom, stem: colour (after removal of bloom), stem: 
type of internodes, leaf: length of 4th  leaf from top, plant: time of  50 % flowering  in primary spike 
(days), stem: number of nodes on main stem, leaf shape, leaf: no. of lobes, leaf: lancination, petiole: 
length, petiole: surface, inflorescence: type of flower on primary spike, spike shape, spike 
compactness, length of primary spike, capsule spininess, capsule length, plant: location of branches, 
branching pattern, plant height in the field as well as seed characters like 100-seed weight, seed shape, 
seed coat colour, seed mottling and seed caruncle as per Revised National Test Guidelines. The 
results of above castor DUS experiments were submitted to Dr. N. Mukta, The Principal Scientist & 
Nodal Officer (DUS), ICAR-Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad.  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 189 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Photo of castor DUS Testing trials conducted during Kharif-2021 at JAU, Junagadh 
 
 
TAMIL NADU AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, COIMBATORE  
 
It is the collaborating centre for dus testing of Sunflower varieties 
 
In sunflower, DUS testing is carried out for two new entries of the first year and two entries of 
the second year along with National check KBSH 44 as per the DUS guidelines.  
 
Table 3.70: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22  
Crops New 
VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year 
entries 2nd year 
entries 
Sunflower  2 2 - - - 
 
 
3.1.61.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR LINSEED 
 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU KRISHI VISHWA VIDYALAYA, JABALPUR (M.P.) 
 
During the year 2021-22 maintained all the reference varieties of the three crops viz., Lentil, Linseed 
and Fieldpea. However, centre did not receive any of the farmers varieties for these crops in current 
year, only three farmers varieties were tested in linseed (second year testing) which was received 
during the year 2020-21 from the Plant Varieties Registry, PPVFRA, NASC, New Delhi, to carry out 
field based GOT as per statutory requirement of the PPVFR Act, 2001. The guidelines and 

Annual Report 2021 -22 190 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 instructions of the PPVFR Authority were followed while conducting the GOT and also follow crop 
specific DUS test guidelines, as applicable. All the precautions were taken to safeguard the interests 
of the PPVFRA while conducting the tests and allow time to time inspection/monitoring by PPVFRA 
officials/Monitoring team/applicants, as and when advised by the PPVFRA. The field data duly 
recorded in field record note book; photos of claimed distinct characters, number of off types 
observed along with specific comments on the distinctiveness and uniformity are included in the 
report.  
Table 3.71: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2020-21:  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
Linseed  - - - 03 - 
 
Table 3.72: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  
Crops Name or No of varieties under maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
Linseed  28 
 
 
3.1.62.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR SESAME AND NIGER 
 
  PC Unit (S&N) ICAR-JNKVV, Jabalpur (MP) is the lead centre. During 2021-22 the seeds of 91 
reference varieties and 4 farmers’ varieties were sown on 16.07.2021 at seed breeding farm, PC Unit 
(S&N), ICAR-JNKVV, Jabalpur during Kharif 2021 in 6 row of 6 m length with 45 cm row to row 
distance under recommended package of practices to maintain the reference varieties as per National 
Test Guidelines in three replication. The germination and plant population were optimum with proper 
expression of distinguishing traits except one farmer’s variety (REG/2016/521). The environmental 
condition was favorable for normal growth. The expression of distinguishing traits of all the reference 
and other varieties were observed as National Test Guideline. 
Table 3.73: Reference varieties of sesame maintained 
S.No. Reference  varieties Number 
1 Total 91 
2 Maintained  91 
3 Not maintained  0 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 191 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.74 : Farmers varieties of sesame sown at PC Unit (S&N), ICAR-JNKVV, Jabalpur 
 
S.No. Reg. No. Denominator  
1 Reg/2016/521  Jadhnati 
2 Reg/2016/476  Baishakhi 
3 Reg/2016/460  Charki Bhadai  
4 Reg/2015/840  Amaghawadh -51 
 
Table 3.75: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Sesame 91 Yes 
Niger 23 - 
 
 
 
3.1.63.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR RAPESEED, INDIAN MUSTARD, KARAN RAI AND  
GOBHI SARSON   
 
ICAR-DIRECTORATE OF RAPESEED –  MUSTARD RESEARCH, SEWAR, 
BHARATPUR, RAJASTHAN    
 
It is the lead centre   
        During the year  total of 9 candidate varieties of Indian mustard were characterized using 
DUS characters. Out of these 04 varieties were characterized for 1st year, 03 varieties were 
Field  
view  15 (*)(+) Capsule:  Arrangements -Cluster  
(3) 
Annual Report 2021 -22 192 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 characterized for 2nd year and 02 hybrids were characterized for 1st year. Apart from these, 05 
Farmer’s varieties (01 Indian mustard, 03 yellow sarson and 01 toria) were grown for 
characterization for 2nd year. Out of these farmer’s varieties only Piliya variety of yellow sarson 
was germinated with poor plant population (R1: 23 plants; R2: 22 plants; R3: 5 plants) while 
there was no germination in rest of the farmer’s varieties. 
 
Table 3.76: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops New VCK FV 
2nd year FV 
1st year Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
1. B.juncea 06 03 - 1 - 
 - 
2. B. rapa var. 
yellow sarson  - - - 3 - 
3. B. rapa var. 
toria - - - 1 - 
 
   Table 3.77: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) Yes/No 
Brassica juncea  93 Data for 10 B. rapa var. yellow 
sarson, 15 B. rapa var. toria, 7 B. 
napus, 5 B. carinata  and 84 B. 
juncea were submitted in 2020 -
21  Brassica 
carinata 4 
Brassica napus    7 
Brassica rapa  27 
 
CSAUA&T, KANPUR, UTTAR PRADESH   
 
It is the collaborating centre for DUS testing of Indian Mustard Karan Rai and  Gobhi 
sarson  
 
During 2021-22 the DUS trail was sown on 01/11/2011 adopting all recommended 
agronomical practices time to time. The data were recorded on 10tagged plants of each entry in 
three replications. Most of the entries were found homogeneous with optimum germination 
percentage. Five RV were undertaken in varietal maintenance, the data have been recorded as 
per guidelines. Harvesting was done as on maturity in three phases (Early, Medium and Late) 
Harvested seed has been stored in optimum conditions for further use. 
 
 
Table 3.78: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 193 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Crops New VCK/
RV Total Date of 
monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
1 06 08 5 19 - 
 
 
3.1.64.   DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR GROUNDNUT 
 
ICAR- DIRECTORATE OF GROUNDNUT RESEARCH, JUNAGADH, GUJARAT 
 
The candidate variety trail code 2877/3187 (New var.) was received in 2020 from PPVFRA. The 
first year and second year DUS characterization was done in Kharif 2020 and Kharif 2021 
respectively with sixteen reference varieties. Additionally multiplication and rejuvenation of 30 
predescribed reference varieties was undertaken during Kharif 2021. All the recommended practices 
was followed to raise a healthy crop. All the observations was recorded at appropriate growth satge 
as per format given by PPVFRA under DUS test guidelines that include 13 qualitative and 
quantitative traits. 
 
Table 3.79: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-2022   
Crops New FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year 2nd year entries  
Griundnut  Trail code 
2877/3
187 
(2020) Trail code 
2877/3187 
(2021) -  29.10.2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plants of New variety trail code 2877/3187 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 194 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.65.  DUS TESTING CENTRES FOR TUBEROSE AND CARNATION 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, BANGALORE  
 
It is the lead centre 
 
Tuberose 
 
During the year 2021-22 reference collection of 30 genotypes of tuberose along with 15 breeding 
lines were being maintained under field gene bank for maintenance breeding.  
 
Observations were recorded for some of the important grouping characteristics such as leaf 
variegation, pigmentation on leaf base, bud colour, flower type, flower shape, spike length, stigma 
type, stigmatic lobes, pigmentation on peduncle, days taken for flowering and number of locules in 
fruit. 
 
Four  accessions of tuberose were characterized. 
Arka Prajwal tuberose variety (REG/2018/71) was registered with PPV and FRA as extant variety 
during July 2022. 
 
Carnation 
 
During the year 2021-22, reference collection of 50 accessions of carnation were multiplied and being 
maintained under field gene bank for maintenance breeding.  
 
Observations were recorded for the important grouping characteristics such as plant type, flower type, 
petal (main colour) and petal (secondary colour), qualitative and quantitative characters. 
IIHRP 1 (Arka Flame/ Reg.No.284/2020) was registered with PPV and FRA as extant variety during 
2020 
 
Table 3.80: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  
 
Crops Name or number of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2020 -21 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Tuberose  30 Yes 
Carnation 50 Yes 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 195 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 3.81: Applications filed with PPVFRA   
Crops No of 
Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
1966 No of Var 
notified 
by the 
center 
Since 
2001 No of applications 
filed 
 
Extant 
Notified  New   
VCK Certifica
tes 
issued Pending 
applicati
ons Reasons for 
pendency 
Tuberose - - 01 
Arka Prajwal  
 
 
 
01 Arka Sugandhi  Issued 
 
 
 
 
  Submitted the 
DUS testing 
report of nodal 
centre and co 
nodal centre  
DUS testing 
report of nodal 
centre and co 
nodal centre will 
be submitted 
2021-22 
Carnation  01  Yes - - 
 
 
DUS Carnation field view 
 
DUS Tuberose field view 

Annual Report 2021 -22 196 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 ICAR – DIRECTORATE OF FLORICULTURAL RESEARCH (DFR), PUNE   
 
Itis the collaborating centre  for tuberose. The DUS testing for the candidate variety ‘Arka 
Sugandhi’ during 2021-22, at Co-Nodal Centre (ICAR-Directorate of Floricultural Research, Pune) is 
in progress. About 14 single types were planted freshly during March-April 2021. The planting 
material of candidate variety, Arka Sugandhi, supplied by ICAR-IIHR, Bengaluru is uniform with 
100% purity, and  were planted along with reference varieties during August 2021. The data will be 
recorded for the candidate variety along with the reference varieties (For the given characteristics as 
per the guidelines given for tuberose). 
 
Table 3.82: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
entries  
1 1 - - - - 
 
 
Table 3.83: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2017 -18 Data Submission  
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Tuberose 25 nos. No 
 
 
3.1.66.  DUS CENTRE FOR MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS  (MENTHOL MINT, 
PERWINKLE, DAMASK ROSE AND BRAHMI) 
 
 
CSIR-CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS (CSIR-CIMAP), 
LUCKNOW .  
 
CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), Lucknow is the lead centre. 
During the year variety CIM-Kranti of menthol mint has been registered with PPVFRA. The 
morphological data on all 11 reference varieties of mint was collected afresh. Maintenance of all 
reference varieties of 4 mandated crops as mentioned in above table was carried out. 
 
 
Table 3.84 : Varieties under maintenance/Characterized: 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 197 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 SN Crops Name or Number of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 
 Data 
submission 
(Maintenanc
e Breeding) 
Yes/No 
 Number Names 
 
1 Menthol mint  
(Mentha arvensis)  11 Kosi, MAS-1, Kalka, Shivalik, 
Gomti, Himalaya, Sakashm, 
Kushal, CIMAP Saryu, CIM -
Kranti and CIM -Unnati 
  
 
 
 
 
No 2 Periwinkle   
(Catharanthus roseus)  4 Dhawal, Nirmal, Prabal and 
CIM-Sushil 
 
3 Damask rose   
(Rosa damascena ) 4 Ranisahiba, Noorjahan, 
Aligarh, Kanouj 
 
4 Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri ) 
 2 CIM-Jagriti, Subodhak  
 
 
 
3.1.67.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR CROSSANDRA 
 
ICAR-INDIAN INSTITUTE OF HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH, HESSARGHATTA LAKE 
POST,  BENGALURU 
 
During the period a reference collection of 5 genotypes of crossandra along with 4 breeding lines and 
one species were being maintained under field gene bank for maintenance breeding.  Observations 
were recorded for some of the important grouping characteristics. 
 
 
Table 3.85: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:  
 
Crops Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Crossandra  10 Yes 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 198 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 General view of Crossandra in the field 
 
 
 
 
3.1.68.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR GRAPES  
 
ICAR-NATIONAL RESEARCH CENTRE FOR GRAPES, PUNE   
 
It is the lead centre 
 
During the year 2021-22, two applications of farmers’ variety (Black Kwin Berry, Siddh Golden) were 
filled for registration with the PPVFR Authority. On-site DUS testing was carried out based on 40 
characters as per DUS guidelines for 10 candidate varieties such as Timco, Timpson, Allison, Melody, 
Ivory, ARRA THIRTY TWO, INIA Grape, Manjari Shyama, Black Kwin Berry and Siddh Golden. Also 
the data of grape reference varieties was collected from DUS plot at ICAR-NRC for Grapes, Pune for 
comparison of the candidate varieties. During the period registration was obtained for five varieties: 
Manjari Naveen, Manjari Kishmish, VSD Seedless, RK Seedless and King Berry. 
 
Table 3.86: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2020-2 1  
 
Crops New VCK FV Date of 
monitoring  1st year entries  2nd year 
entries 
1 Timco, Timpson, Allison, Melody, 
Ivory, ARRA THIRTY TWO, 
INIA Grape One  Manjari 
Shyama -  Black Kwin 
Berry 
 Siddh Golden  - 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 199 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Table 3.87: Varieties under maintenance/characterized: 
 
Crops Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2020 -21 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) Yes/No  
Grape 57 Yes 
 
 
3.1.69.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR JACKFRUIT 
 
UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES, GKVK, BANGALORE 
 
During the 2021-22 released new Jackfruit variety Byrachandra from UAS, Bangalore. The variety 
bears fruits twice a year, with orange yellow colour flakes. The fruit is suitable for table purpose as 
well as for vegetable use. The centre also filed five Jackfruit farmers’ varieties with PPV and FRA, 
New Delhi. 
 
Identified eight elite Jackfruit varieties from farmers’ field and will be characterized further for 
registration with PPV and FRA. New Germplasm block with 25 elite Farmers Jackfruit varieties are 
planted in GKVK campus.Testing two farmers varieties -Siddu and Shankara  
 
Table 3.88: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-22 
 
S.no. New VCK FV Date of monitoring  
1st year 
entries 2nd year  
Entries  
1 Siddu     
2 Shankara     
 
 Table 3.89: Varieties under maintenance/characterized:   80  
 
Mandated Crop 
Species  Name or No of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in 2021 -22 Data Submission  
(Maintenance Breeding) 
Yes/No 
Jackfruit Total varieties – Eighty  (80)  
Yielding varieties – Thirty (30)  
 Yes  
(Table attached)  
 
 
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 200 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.1.70.  DUS TESTING CENTRE FOR SEABUCKTHORN 
 
 COLLEGE OF FORESTRY, DR. YS PARMAR UNIVERSITY OF HORTICULTURE AND 
FORESTRY, NAUNI-SOLAN, HIMACHAL PRADESH 
 
During the year 2021-22 the 13 varieties/clones of seabuckthorn under maintenance breeding 
were raised and the morphological data on Qualitative, Pseudo qualitative and quantitative 
characteristics of all the varieties was obtained which were compared and the unique characters for 
each species were recorded. The DUS characters for each variety of Seabuckthorn under maintenance 
testing have already been published by Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority. 
Those characters were sincerely matched again this year.  The data collected was analysed and 
explained which is being submitted with the report. 
 
The four farmer varieties are under trial which is to be raised this year and next year for proper 
examination of morphological characters in general as well as grouping characteristics, decided as per 
DUS Guidelines. 
 
Table 3.90: Varieties under maintenance / characterized: 
 
Mandated Crop Species  Name or No. of varieties under 
maintenance breeding in              
2021-22 Data     submission 
(Maintenance 
Breeding) Yes/No  
Seabuckthorn  
(Hippophae  rhamnoides 
L.)  13 (Thirteen)  
Rangreek, Kaza, Sheigo, Schilling, 
Poh, Tabo, Lari, Mane, Hurling, Pin 
Valley, DIHAR -F64,DIHAR -F74,  
DIHAR-F75  Yes 
 
Table 3.91: Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-2022   
Crops New FV Date of monitoring  
1st 
year 2nd year 
entries  
Seabuckthorn 
(Hippophae  rhamnoides 
L.)   SHINGA 
(REG/2021/0062)  Plant characteristics  
(December,2021)  
Shoot characteristics  
(March-,2022) 
Leaf characteristics  
( July,2021)  
Thorns characteristics  
(September,2021)  
Fruit  characteristics  
( Second Week of  
October)    KAMROO  
(REG/2021/0061)  
   THANGI 
(DL1703210001)  
   THANGI 
(DL170321002)  
Annual Report 2021 -22 201 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Seed 
Thorns characteristics  
(October,2021)  
Flowering 
characteristics  
(May, 2022)  
 
Key observation of the monitoring team: 
There are four farmer varieties which are under observation/ Testing. This year, the farmer 
varieties were observed ‘on site testing’ from where the morphological data on Qualitative, Pseudo 
qualitative and quantitative characteristics of plant, leaf, thorns, fruit and seed were recorded. The 
planting material of these four farmer varieties was brought from respective site and propagated 
through cutting in the field for further evaluation of these varieties.  It will take at least two seasons/ 
two year for recording the characters, by which the similarity between the maintenance variety and 
farmer variety will be worked out on the basis of DUS Guidelines on Seabuckthorn. 
 
3.2 GENE BANKS OF PPVFRA 
As per Section 27, of PPVFR Act, 2001, a breeder has to deposit seeds and propagating material 
inclduign parental line seeds of registered variety in the National Gene Bank, as may be specified in 
the regulations for reproduction purpose. 
The National Gene Bank of PPVFRA has been established at ICAR-NBPGR Old Campus for 
medium term storage of orthodox or true seeds (e.g. rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, tomato, rapeseed-
mustard, jute etc) of candidate varieties for plant variety registration purpose at PPVFRA.  
However, for fruit trees  (like coconut, mango and citrus), plantation species (like eucalyptus and 
poplar), spices (black peppers, ginger and turmeric), commercial species, like rubber, that either 
produces recalcitrant (seed normally do not withstand desiccation or low temperature storage and are 
not easy to store under conventional storage conditions) seeds having long regeneration cycles or 
sexually sterile, no seeds at all or species that are normally clonally propagated (sugarcane and 
potato), planting matrial of   these species are conserved at Field Gene Bank under ex situ conditions. 
Since the diversity of the genetic resources is abundant near the places of primary of secondary 
centres of origin or domestication, the species concerned are also adapted to the local agro-climatic 
conditions (like soil, water, temperature etc0, field gene bank are also strategically established in 
these areas.  
 The Field Gene Banks facility will also be used as a repository of the varieties released 
(referral collection) from different geographical contexts having sub species/ intra varietal variability 
and conserved at one place. Field Gene Bank will also maintain specimen plants of the varieties 
registered under the PPVFR Act, 2001. Documentation regarding source, parentage, morphological/ 
sexual/ value for cultivation characteristics, digitalization and database management will help in 
resolving techno-legal issues and dispute settlement.  
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 202 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3.2.1 NATIONAL GENE BANK, NBPGR OLD CAMPUS, NEW DELHI 
The working of medium-term facility is being monitored under this project, by the technical expert s 
of ICAR-NBPGR and the electrical facility is being maintained by the electrician employed under this 
project. The temperature of the cold store is maintained at +4°C and the relative humidity has been 
adjusted to 35%. The relative humidity and temperature of the medium-term storage (MTS) module 
and the DUS test repository are recorded everyday by the electrician and major problems if any, are 
brought to the notice of technical personnel at NBPGR and resolved accordingly. During the period 
under report, servicing and repairing of DG set and other minor repair works in MTS has been done 
for uninterrupted electricity supply to the PPV& FRA Gene bank.  
Seeds samples of 673 registered varieties stored in the Gene-bank (MTS) of PPVFRA were tested for 
germination and moisture after 5 years of their storage for cereals, legumes and vegetable seeds and 3 
years of the storage for oil seeds. 
 
Crops No. of varieties monitored 
during the FY 2021 -2022 Moisture range (%)  Germination Range (%)  
 
Barley 6 12.83-13.91 100-100 
Bottlegourd  1 9.37 64 
Brinjal 3 9.4-11.44 12-92 
Chickpea 4 11.86-12.39 16-100 
Chili 2 10.10-10.17 0-24 
Cucumber  1 9.63 96 
Diploid Cotton  13 6.51-11.04 44-88 
Durum Wheat  4 7.79-11.35 96-100 
Field Pea  1 10.32 100 
Finger Millet  1 13.52 84 
Green gram 1 12.24 100 
Jute 3 4.32-12.69 0-32 
Kidney bean  2 11.67-13.62 0-20 
Maize 78 5.2-16 0-100 
Muskmelon  2 7.06-8.64 76-100 
Okra 32 9.0-13.88 0-100 
Onion 3 10.88-12.19 16-60 
Pearl millet  10 11.06-16.41 16.100 
Pigeonpea  2 12.16-12.25 84-100 
Pumpkin 2 7.68-8.40 0-92 
Rice 363 5.48-16.57 0-100 
Sorghum 17 7.52-14.95 0-100 
Tetraploid cotton  59 7.10-12.95 32-100 
Tomato 25 6.94-15.73 0-100 
Wheat 21 6.68-15.49 24-100 
Castor 1 5.48 84 
Indian Mustard  8 7.49-8.56 40-92 
Annual Report 2021 -22 203 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Rapeseed  1 7.09 100 
Sesame 4 5.17-5.76 4-88 
Soybean 2 7.84-10.13 80-100 
Sunflower  1 6.54 96 
 
3.2.1.3 Additional sample testing : During the period under report 15 seed samples of cotton and 275 
seed samples of paddy were tested for standard germination. Germination tests were conducted using 
top-of-paper method for rice and between paper method for cotton seeds.  
 
3.2.1.3.1 Medium term storage condition & DUS Repository (as on 31st March, 2022) 
 
Sl. Crops DUS Test Repository (STS)  Medium Term Storage  GRAND 
TOTAL (Candidate varieties for DUS test kept at 220C) (4˚C) 
SEED RECEIVED   A  CERTIFICATE ISSUED   B  
New VCK 
+EDV Farmer Extant 
Notified Total  New VCK 
+EDV Farmer Extant 
Notified Total   
        (A)         (B) (A+B) 
1 Barley 11 5 37 6 59   1 5 17 23 82 
2 Barnyard 
Millet     39 2 41       1 1 42 
3 Bitter 
Gourd 29 25 15   69   8 1 1 10 79 
4 Black Gram  4 2 111 16 133 1   2 30 33 166 
5 Bottle 
Gourd 9 11 48   68   5 2 4 11 79 
6 Brinjal 115 88 93 4 300 26 82 7 13 128 428 
7 Cabbage  17 1 1   19 4 1   1 6 25 
8 Bread 
Wheat 29 3 89 21 142 35 10 29 151 225 367 
9 Castor 4 2 7   13 3 3   5 11 24 
10 Cauliflower  40 12 13 1 66 16 8 1 3 28 94 
11 Chickpea     1 75 14 89 2   15 51 68 157 
12 Chilli 114 139 22 8 283     1 8 9 292 
13 Coriander  1   30   31       1 1 32 
14 Cowpea   1   4 5       1 1 6 
15 Cucumber  8 21 32   61   2   2 4 65 
16 Fennel     1   1           1 
17 Durum 
Wheat 1   4 4 9 4   2 26 32 41 
18 Dicoccum 
Wheat 4       4       5 5 9 
19 Diploid 
Cotton 5 3   4 12 12 9   29 50 62 
20 Faba Bean      2 1 3       1 1 4 
21 Fenugreek      10   10     1   1 11 
Annual Report 2021 -22 204 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 22 Finger 
Millet 1   56 6 63       10 10 73 
23 Foxtail 
Millet     32 2 34       1 1 35 
24 Garden Pea        2 2       2 2 4 
25 French 
Bean     4   4           4 
26 Grain 
Amaranth  1   4 3 8       1 1 9 
27 Green 
Gram 4 3 52 12 71   1 6 35 42 113 
28 Groundnut  5 1  19 2 26           26 
29 Jute 10 2 4 1 17 9 1   13 23 40 
30 Kidney 
Bean  1 2 23 1 26   2 1 9 12 38 
31 Kodo Millet      98   98           98 
32 Lentil     58 2 60     8 12 20 80 
33 Linseed     57 2 59       7 7 66 
34 Little Millet      77 1 78       3 3 81 
35 Maize 329 56 285 47 717 176 60 7 92 335 1052 
36 Marigold  2   4   6           6 
37 Muskmelon  8   1   9       2 2 11 
38 Mustard 20 9 59 7 95 4 14 11 54 83 178 
39 Okra 83 44 25 3 155 16 19 1 16 52 207 
40 Onion 3 12 7 2 24 2 1   11 14 38 
41 Pea 5 3 92 2 102     3 29 32 134 
42 Pearl Millet  155 280 20 25 480 68 37 1 56 162 642 
43 Pigeon Pea  13 2 171 9 195 16 2 10 25 53 248 
44 Pumpkin      30   30       3 3 33 
45 Rapeseed      21 1 22     9 13 22 44 
46 Rice 344 53 2588 124 3109 165 50 1720 271 2206 5315 
47 Ridge 
Gourd 8 2 19   29   1   1 2 31 
48 Safflower  3   1 3 7       7 7 14 
49 Sesame     66 2 68     1 10 11 79 
50 Snap Melon      12   12           12 
51 Sorghum  64 8 60 23 155 70 38 19 57 184 339 
52 Soybean  8   22 2 32 2 1 6 36 45 77 
53 Sunflower  66 7   1  73 39 19   11 69 142 
54 Tetraploid 
Cotton 312 161 
+115 1 24 613 137 207 + 
14 1 70 429 1042 
55 Tomato 132 91+3 20 9 255 40 40 3 16 99 354 
56 Velvet Bean     2   2           2 
57 Watermelon  4 17     21   4     4 25 
Total  1971 1183 4619 402 8175 847 640 1873 1223 4583 12758 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 205 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
3.2.3 Seed Standards 
S. 
No Crop Date of 
Notification  Seed 
Requirement 
Candidate 
/Parental line 
Hybrid (each) in 
gm unless 
otherwise 
mentioned  Germination 
% Moisture 
% Physical 
Purity 
% Tentative 
Season – 
Months for 
seed 
submission 
for DUS 
testing Prescribed 
size of seed 
packets 
(mm) 
1 Rice (Oryza sativa  L.) 
1/11/2006  3000 1500 80 11-12 98 Kharif –
March-Apr 230x300 
2 Bread Wheat 
(Triticum aestivum  L.) 3000 1500 95 8-9 98 Rabi-Aug 230x300 
3 Maize (Zea mays L.) 3000 1500 80(inbred/SCH
)90(var/DCH)  8-10 98 Kharif-Mar-
Apr 
Rabi- Aug 230x300 
4 Sorghum ( Sorghum 
bicolor ( L.) Moench)  2000 1000 80 10 98 Kharif- 
March Rabi -
Aug 230x300 
5 Pearl Millet 
(Pennisetum 
glaucum (L.) R.Br.)  600 300 80(inbred/ 
SCH) 
90(var/DCH)  10 98 Kharif-
March 165x220 
6 Chickpea ( Cicer 
arietinum  L.) 2000 
(desi) 
3000 
(kabuli) N.A. 95 8-9 98 Rabi-Aug 230x300 
7 Green Gram ( Vigna 
radiate (L.) Wilczek)  1000 N.A. 95 8-9 98 Kharif -
March 230x300 
8 Black Gram ( Vigna 
mungo (L.) Hepper)  1000 N.A. 95 8-9 98 Kharif-
March 165x 
220 
9 Field Pea ( Pisum 
sativum L.) 2000 N.A. 85 8-9 98 Rabi-Aug 230x 
300 
10 Kidney Bean 
(Phaseolus 
vulgaris L.) 3000 N.A. 85 8-9 98 June-July 230x 
300 
11 Lentil (Lens 
culinaris Medik) 1000 N.A. 85 8-9 98 Rabi-Aug 230x 
300 
12 Pigonpea ( Cajanus 
cajan (L.) Millsp.)  2000 1500 95 8-9 98 Kharif-Mar 230x 
300 
13 Cotton (Gossypium 
hirsutum L.) 
31/12/2007  2000 1000 75 10 98 
Kharif- 
North- Feb 
Peninsular - 
South-May-
June 
  
  230x 
300 
  
  
  14 Cotton (G. 
barbadense  L.) 2000 1000 75 10 98 
15 Cotton (G. 
arboreum  L.) 1500 750 75 10 98 
16 Cotton (G. 
herbaceum  L.) 1500 750 75 10 98 
17 Jute (Corchorus 1000 500 85 9 97 Pre-Kharif-165x 
Annual Report 2021 -22 206 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 capsularis  L.) early Jan 220 
18 Jute (Corchorus 
olitorius L.) 1000 500 85 9 97 Pre-Kharif-
early Jan   
19 Sugarcane 
(Saccharum  L.) 
27/7/2009  400 single bud sett   
20 Ginger (Zingiber 
officinale Rosc.) 5000 g (clean and whole sum rhizome of 25 -30 g each  of 150 pieces)  
21 Turmeric ( Curumma 
longa L.) 6 kg (clean and whole sum fresh rhizome with 35 -40% moisture content)  
22 Indian Mustard 
(Brassica juncea L. 
Czern & Coss)  
30/4/2010  500 250        Jun-Jul  165x100 
23 Karan rai (Brassica 
carinata A Braun)  500 250        Jun-Jul  165x100 
24 Rapeseed -Mustard 
(Brassica rapa  L.) 500 250 85 8 98 June-Jul 165x100 
25 Gobhi sarson 
(Brassica napus L.) 500 250        Jun-Jul  165x100 
26 Groundnut ( Arachis 
hypogaea  L.) 3000(Sp
anish & 
Valenci
a) 
8000(ke
rnel) for 
Virginia 
bunch 
and 
runner 
type 1500 
4000 80 9 98 Kharif: May-
June  
 
Rabi:Aug -
Sep 300x450 
27 Soybean ( Glycine 
max (L.) Merrill)  3000 --- 70 9 98 Apr-May 230x300 
28 Sunflower 
(Helianthus 
annuus L.) 3000 2000 70 9 98 July-Aug 230x300 
29 Safflower ( Carthamus 
tinctorius  L.) 3000 1500 80 9 98 June-July 230x300 
30 Castor (Ricinus 
communis  L.) 6000 2500 70 10 98 April-May 300x450 
31 Sesamum ( Sesamum 
indicum L.) 500 250 80 9 97 April -May 165x100 
32 Linseed ( Linum 
usitatissimum  L.) 500 250 85 9 98 May-June 165x100 
33 Black pepper ( Piper 
nigrum L.) 40 no of rooted cuttings  
34 Small cardamom 
(Elettaria 
cardamomom Maton) 50 Suckers  
35 Tomato (Lycopersion 
lycopersicum  (L.) 
Karsten ex. Farw.)  2/12/2010  15(open 
field) 8 
(Greenh
ouse) same 85 8 98 April- May 165x100 
36 Brinjal (Solanum 15(open 15(ope 85 8 98 April- May 165x100 
Annual Report 2021 -22 207 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 melongena  L.) ) n) 
37 Okra (Abelmoschus 
esculentus  (L.) 
Moench.)  200 -        May-June  230x300 
38 Cauliflower ( Brassica 
oleracea L.var. 
botrytis) 15 15 * * * April- May 165x100 
39 Cabbage ( Brassica 
oleracea L. var 
capitata) 15 15 * * * April- May 165x100 
40 Potato (Solanum 
tuberosum  L.) 300 Fully matured tubers (Tuber size should be 3.5 -5.0 cm)  
41 Onion (Allium 
cepa L.) 100 
1200 
bulblet 
(multipl
ier) 50 
bulbs(M
S lines) 50 70 * * As per 
respective 
sowing 
seasons   
42 Garlic (Allium 
sativum L.) 2000 
viable 
clove -- * * * Aug-Sep - 
43 Rose (Rosa spp. (other 
than R.damascena )) 9 grafted/budded plants  
9 plants in 12 inch or 30 cm pots size  
44 Chrysanthemum 
(Chrysanthemum 
spp.) 100 two node terminal rooted cutting taken from mother plant  
45 Mango (Mangifera 
indica L.) 7 grafted  for each location      
46 Duram wheat 
(Triticum 
durumDesf.) 
18/8/2011  3000 1500 95 8-9 98 Same as 
wheat 230x300 
47 Dicoccum wheat  
(Triticum 
dicoccum  L.) 3000 1500 95 8-9 98 Same as 
wheat 230x300 
48 Other Triticum sp 3000 1500 95 8-9 98 Same as 
wheat 230x300 
49 Isabgol (Plantago 
ovata Forsk) 250 - 95 8-9 98 Rabi: Nov -
Dec 230 x 300  
50 Menthol mint 
(Mentha arvensis L.) 5 Kg suckers (10 -15 cm long)  
51 Damask Rose ( Rosa 
damascena  Mill) 100 Cutting  
52 Periwinkle 
(Catharanthus 
roseus L.) 10 gm - 85 8 98 Kharif : 
June-July 230 x 300  
53 Brahmi (Bacopa 
monnieri L.Pennell)  500 Cutting (clean and wholesome vegetative parts 10 -15 cm long) 
54 Coconut ( Cocos 
nucifera L.) 30 number of one year old seedlings raised in polybag containing standard potting mixture  
55 Orchids ( Cymbidium 27/3/2012  20 plants (10 for each centre) with at least two pseudo -bulbs and one back -bulb. Age 3-4 years 
Annual Report 2021 -22 208 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Sw.) 
56 Orchids ( Dendrobium 
Sw.) 20 plants (10 for each Centre) with at least two shoots. Age 2 -3 years 
57 Orchids ( Vanda 
jones ex R. Br.)  20 plants, Age 2 -3 year 
58 Pomegranate ( Punica 
granatum  L) 
15/4/2014  10 propagules, One year old raised  through air layering or rooted stem cutting (multiplied 
from the same tree) or tissue culture raised plants for each location.  
59 Orchid (Cattleya 
Lindl.) 20 plants two or three year old with at least two shoot  
60 Orchid (Phalaenopsis 
Blume) 20 flowering size plants  
61 Casurina ( Casurina 
equisetifolia  L.) 50 rooted cutting ( at least three month old),  measuring minimum 20 cm from collar to apical 
tip with a well developed root system  62 Casurina ( Casurina 
junghuhniana Miq.) 
63 Bitter gourd  
(Momordica 
charantia  L.) 300 gm 
or 1500 
no - 80 8 98 
Dec-Jan 230x300 
64 Bottle gourd 
(Lagenaria 
siceraria (Mol.) 
Standl.) 250 gm 
or 1500 
no - 80 8 98 230x300 
65 Cucumber ( Cucumis 
sativus L.) 50 gm 
or 1500 
no - 80 8 98 230x300 
66 Pumpkin ( Cucurbita  
moschata  Duch. ex 
Poir.) 200 gm 
or 1500 
no - 80 8 98 230x300 
67 Barley (Hordeum 
vulgare L.) 1500 1000 95 8 98 Aug-Sep 230x300 
68 Coriander 
(Coriandrum 
sativum L.) 250 - 80 8-9 98 Jul-Aug 165x100 
69 Fenugreek ( Trigonella 
foenum graecum L.) 250 - 80 8-9 98 Jul-Aug 165x100 
70 Almond ( Prunus 
dulcis (Mill.) D.A. 
Webb) 10 grafted or budded plants  
71 Apple (Malus 
domestica  Borkh) 6 grafted or budded plants  
72 Pear (Pyrus 
communis  L.) 6 grafted or budded plants  
73 Apricot (Prunus 
armeniaca  L.) 10 grafted or budded plants  
74 Cherry (Prunus 
avium L.) 10 grafted or budded plants  
75 Walnut (Juglans 
regia L.) 10 grafted or budded plants   
76 Grapes (Vitis spp. ) 12 grafted plants(one yr old) for each location  
77 Indian jujube (Ber) 
(Ziziphus 7 plants for each DUS centre(minimum age 3 months )  
Annual Report 2021 -22 209 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 mauritiana Lamk.) 
78 Eucalyptus 
(Eucalyptus 
camaldulensis 
Dehnh.) 60 rooted plant (plant should be in 250 cc root trainer)having minimum age of 6 months  
79 Eucalyptus 
(Eucalyptus 
tereticornis  Sm.) 
80 Tea (Camellia 
sinensis L.)  
16/10/2014  75 Plants (15 -18 inches height), young plant having pencil thick stem with their own root  81 Tea (C. assamica ) 
82 Tea (C. assamica ssp 
lasiocalyx.)  
83 Acid Lime ( Citrus 
aurantifolia Swingle) 10 plants for each DUS centre. Age should be above six months  
84 Mandarin ( Citrus 
reticulata Blanco) 10 plants for each DUS centre. Age should be above six months   
85 Sweet Orange ( Citrus 
sinensis (L.) Osbeck)  10 plants for each DUS centre. Age should be above six months 
86 Bougainvillea 
(Bougainvillea 
Comm. Ex Juss.)  10 well rooted and established plant   
87 Banana (Musa spp .) 40 uniform tissue cultured plant in one submission per location  
88 Orchid (Oncidium 
sw.) 20 plants 2 -3 year old with at least two pseudo-bulbs/shoots   
89 Canna (Canna L.) 
21/1/2015  20 young plants or 20 matured rhizomes  
90 Gladioulus 
(Gladioulus  L.) 30 Corms (4 - 4.5 cm in diameter)   
91 Muskmelon ( Cucumis 
melo L.) 100 gm 
seed for 
open 
field 
cultivati
on - 80 8 98  Dec-Jan  230x300 
92 Watermelon 
(Citrullus Lanatus 
(Thunb.) Mansf.)  150 gm 
seed for 
open 
field 
cultivati
on - 80 8 98  Dec-Jan  230x300 
93 Jasmine ( Jasminum 
auriculatum L.) 
2/7/2015 20 rooted plant  
94 Tuberose ( Polianthes 
tuberosa L) 75 Bulbs of   more than 2 cm  (diameter at broadest point) weighing 25 -30 gm 
95 Papaya (Carica 
papaya L.) 20 gm 
for 
gynodio
ecious 
varieties 
& 40 
gm for - 60 7% for 
ambiant 
storage 98% for 
varieties 
& 90% 
for 
Hybrids  --  --- 
Annual Report 2021 -22 210 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 dioeciou
s 
varieties 
in both 
season 
96 China Aster 
(Callistephus 
chinensis (L.) Nees.)  2 gm 
each in 
two 
packets - 60 6-9 98  ---  --- 
97 Peach (Prunus 
persica L.Batsch.)  10 grafted or budded plants  
98 Japanese Plum 
(Prunus salicina L.) 10 grafted or budded plants  
99 Strawberry ( Fragaria 
x ananasan  Duch.) 120 runners or plant propugules or seedling plants  (tissue cultured plant hardned at 4 -5 leaf 
Stage) 
100 Chilli, Bell Pepper 
and Paprika 
(Capsicum 
annuum L.) 15 gm 
for 
Open 
polinate
d crop 
& 10 
gm for 
Hybrid 
and 
Parental 
line - 85 8 98  Aug-Sep  165x100 
101 Finger Millet 
(Eleusine 
coracana  (L.) Gaertn. 
) 250 gm 
& 10 
Panicles - 80 10-12 97 Apr-May 230x300 
102 Foxtail Millet ( Setaria 
italic (L.) Beauv )  250 gm 
& 10 
Panicles -  80 11-12 97  Apr-May 230x300 
103 Vegetable Amaranth 
(Amaranthus tricolor 
L.) 
19/4/2016  150 g 
(in one 
submiss
ion 
only)   80 <8 98  July-Sep  165x100 
104 Ridge gourd ( Luffa 
acutangula  (L.) 
Roxb.) 250g or 
1500 
seeds 
(in one 
submiss
ion 
only)   80 <8 98  Dec-Jan  230-x300 
105 Spinach beet ( Beta 
vulgaris var. 
bengalensis Roxb.)  250 g 
(in one 
submiss
ion 
only)   80 <8 98  Aug-Sep  165x100 
Annual Report 2021 -22 211 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 106 Carnation ( Dianthus 
caryophyllus  L.) 150 rooted cuttings  
107 Orchid 
(Paphiopedilum  
Pfitz.) 10 plants for each centres  
108 Noni (Morinda 
citrifolia L.) 
13/7/2016  10 grafted or budded plants for each location  
109 Bael (Aegle marmelos  
(L.) Correa)  5 Plants for each centres   
110 Jamun/Black plum 
(Syzygium cuminii 
(L.) Skeels.)  07 grafts for each location  
111 Nutmeg ( Myristica 
fragrans Houtt.) 10 grafted or budded plants for each location  
112 Jasmine/Mogra 
(Jasminum sambac  
L.) 20 rooted plants for each location  
113 Custard apple / Sugar 
apple (Annona 
squamosa  L.) 8 grafts 
114 Kalmegh /King of 
Bitters (Andrographis 
paniculata  (Burm.f.) 
Wall. ex Nees )  30 gm   95 8-9 98  Kharif : 
May-June  230 x 300  
115 Neem (Azadirachta 
indica A. Juss.) 
12/5/2017  40 clonally rooted plants with 60 cm height  
116 Karanj (Pongamia 
pinnata (L.) Pierre.)  40 clonally rooted plants with 60 cm height  
117 Indian Gooseberry 
(Emblica officinalis  
Gaertn.) 03-04 months old plants  
118 Betelvine ( Piper betle  
L.) Rooted cutting terminal shoots shall be 3 months old with 25 cm height   
119 Marigold (Tagetes 
spp. L) 10 gm 
seed or 
200 Nos 
rooted 
cuttings   80 Not more 
than 8 98  Apr-May  165x100 
120 Guava (Psidium 
guajava L.) 10 grafts/ air layers for each locations  
121 Litchi (Litchi 
chinensis Sonn.) 7 air layers for each location  
122 Deodar (Cedrus 
deodara) (Roxb.) G. 
Don 5 trees  
123 Chir pine ( Pinus 
roxburghii ) Sargent 5 trees  
124 Mulberry ( Morus 
spp.) 50 stem cuttings   of 12-15 cm length & 1.0 -1.5 cm diameter  
Annual Report 2021 -22 212 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 125 Jasmine ( Jasminum 
multiflorum  L.) 20 numbers of 6 months old, fully rooted plants   
126 Buckwheat 
(Fagopyrum 
esculentum ) 500 
gram   80 not more 
than 10% 98  Kharif: 
May-June 
  165 x 100  
  
127 Buckwheat 
(Fagopyrum 
tataricum ) 500 
gram   80 not more 
than 10%  98 
128 Grain Amaranth 
(Amaranthus 
hypocondricus ) 50 gram   80 not more 
than 10%  98 Kharif: May -
June 
Rabi: Sept -
Oct 
  
  
  165 x 100  
  
  
  129 Grain Amaranth ( A. 
cruentus) 50 gram   80 not more 
than 10%  98 
130 Grain Amaranth ( A 
caudatus) 50 gram   80 not more 
than 10%  98 
131 Grain Amaranth ( A. 
edulis) 50 gram   80 not more 
than 10%  98 
132 Faba bean ( Vicia faba  
L. var. major Harz)  150 
gram   70 not more 
than 9% 98  Rabi: Sept -
Oct  230 x300 
133 Elephant Foot Yam 
(Amorphophallus 
Paeoniffolius ) 36 tubers 200 -400g each  
134 Taro  (Colocasia 
esculenta var. 
esculenta, Colocasia 
esculenta var. 
antiquorum, 
Colocasia esculenta  
var. stoloniferum)  36 tubers 30 -40g each  
135 Taro (Cyrtosperma 
chamissonis / C. 
merkusii ) 36 tubers 30 -40g each 
136 Jatropha ( Jatropha 
curcas L.) 60 rooted plants with 60 cm height, in June -July 
137 Barnyard millet 
(Echinocloa 
frumentaceae  (Roxb.) 
Link) 250 
grams 
seed 
with 10 
panicles   80 12 97 Apr-May 230x300 
138 Kodo millet 
(Paspalum 
scorbiculatum  L.) 500 
grams 
seed 
with 10 
panicles   80 12 97 Apr-May 230x300 
139 Little millet ( Panicum 
sumatrense  Roth. Ex 
Roemer And 
Schultes) 150 grams 
seed with 
10 
panicles   80 12 97 Apr-May 230x300 
140 Proso millet ( Panicum 
miliaceum  L.) 200 grams 
seed with 
10 
panicles   80 12 97 Apr-May 230x300 
Annual Report 2021 -22 213 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 141 Cashew ( Anacardium 
occidentale  L.) 
23/10/2017  8 grafted plants  
142 Arecanut ( Areca 
catechu L.) 10 numbers of one year -old seedlings  
143 Chironji ( Buchanania 
lanzan Sperng.) 
9/1/2018 09 grafts for each location  
144 Tamarind ( Tamarindus 
indica L.) 09 grafts for each location  
150 vine cuttings (each one with a length of 30cm with 5 to 8 buds) for both centres  145 Sweet potato 
(Ipomoea batatas  (L.) 
Lam.) 
146 Cassava ( Manihot 
esculenta Crantz.) 100 cuttings for each centre, length 20 cm with minimum 5 to 8 viable buds  
147 Poplar (Populus 
deltoides L.) 120 cuttings from 1 year old plants  
148
-
154 Willow (Salix 
species) Salix 
tetrasperma, Salix 
nigra, Salix 
jessoensis, Salix x 
rubens, Salix 
matsudana, Salix 
alba, Salix 
acmophylla . 11/7/ 2018  120 hardwood cuttings, diameter  
1 cm and length 20 cm  
155 Oat (Avena sativa  L.) 1,000 
gm   85 10 98 Jul-Aug 230x300 
156 Date Palm ( Phoenix 
dactylifera  L.) 06 Rooted suckers (offshoots),  weight 8 -10 kg  
157 Moringa ( Moringa 
oleifera L.) 18/7/ 2019  30 plants or 100 pure seeds for each centre  
158 Melia (Melia 
dubia Cav.) 25/2/ 2019  100 rooted plants.  
159 Pointed Gourd 
(Trichosanthes 
dioica Roxb.) 15/12/2020  50 (fifty) tuberous root/ rooted vine cuttings (having minimum 3 nodes)  
160 Crossandra 
(Crossandra 
infundibuliformis  (L.) 
Nees.) 15/12/2020  100 terminal rooted cuttings in plugs or pro -trays (50 for each center) of 6 cm to 8 cm  
161 Cowpea ( Vigna 
unguiculata  (L.) 
Walp. ssp. 
unguiculata  and Vign
a unguiculata  (L.) 
Walp. ssp. 
sesquipedalis  (L.) 
Verdc. )  15/12/2020  1,000 gm 95 9 98  May-June  230x300 
162 Jackfruit ( Artocarpus 
heterophyllus Lam .) 23/08/2021  The plant material has to be supplied in the form of grafts / budded plants.  
163 Greater Yam 
(Dioscorea alata L.)  10 healthy tubers 750 -1100g 
Annual Report 2021 -22 214 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 164 Yam Bean 
(Pachyrhizus erosus 
(L.) The minimum quantity of planting material (seeds), to be supplied by the applicant, should be 
75 - 100g for three replications.  
165 Seabuckthrorn 
(Hippophae 
rhamnoides L.)  The minimum required quantity of planting material, should be at least seven well rooted one -
year-old plants in poly bags with at least two shoots.  
166 Ajwain 
(Trachyspermum 
ammi L.) 
16/03/2022  New-50g,ENV- 
10g, VCK - 25g, 
FV- 25g 65%  8-9%  98% Rabi: Oct -Nov 
165 x 100  167 Anise (Pimpenella 
anisum L.)  New- 100g, ENV -
20g, VCK -50g, FV-
50g 65% 9-10% 98% Rabi: Oct  
168 Celery (Apium 
graveolens L.)  New-50g, ENV -
10g, VCK -25g,, 
FV-25g 65% 8-9% 98% Rabi: Oct  
169 Cumin (Cuminum 
cyminum L.)  
 New-100g, ENV -
20g, VCK -50g, FV-
50g 65% 8-9% 98% Rabi: Oct  
170 Dill (Anethum 
graveolens L . and 
Anethum sowa Roxb)  New-100g, ENV -
20g, VCK -50g, FV-
50g 65% 8-9% 98% Rabi: Oct  
171 Fennel (Foeniculum  
vulgare Mill.)  New-200g, ENV -
40g, VCK -100g, 
FV-100g 70% 8-9% 98% Rabi: Oct  
172 Nigella (Nigella 
sativa L.)  New-100g, ENV -
20g, VCK -50g, FV-
50g 65% 8-9% 98% Rabi: Oct  
 
3.3 REGIONAL HORTICULTURAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING STATION, 
MASHOBRA; DR Y S PARMAR UNIV. OF HORT. AND FORESTRY, MASHOBRA, 
SHIMLA 
The project has the following objective (s) and madate crops  (Apple, Pear and Cherry).  
 
 Maintenance of variety collection block of temperate fruits- apple, pear and sweet cherry. 
 Morphological characterization of varieties from DUS point of view. 
 Collection of prominent farmer’s varieties.   
 
a) Detail of DUS testing of candidate varieties in 2021-2022: 
 
Application for apple variety “Kanwar Majholi Selection- I” was filed by  Sh. Joginder Kanwar S/O 
Late Sh. Narain Singh Village Majholi,  P O Kathog, Tehsil Theog, District Shimla,  HP for 
registration through Regional Horticultural Research & Training Station, Mashobra during the year 
2016. During the year 2021, Scientists from CITH, Srinagar along with Dr Dinesh S Thakur, 
Associate Director, RHR&TS, Mashobra conducted ON-Site DUS testing of above said variety on 3rd 
September, 2021.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 215 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 The whole limb sport having blushed (mutated) and stripped fruits (non- mutated) fruits of 
Red Delicious apple tree was spotted at farmer field Majholi village. The fruit samples of normal 
(non-mutated) as well as mutated limbs were collected and further analyzed for fruit quality 
characteristics. The bud wood of mutated limb was collected from the site and further grafted to 
obtain early bearing as well as to observe perpetuation of the character at the research farm of 
RHR&TS Mashobra. 
 
       
Fruits from original branch  
 
Mutant “Kanwar Majholi Selection -I” 
 
     
 
b) Varieties under maintenance / Characterized: 
 Details of varieties collected/ maintained under Field Gene Bank of Temperate Fruits at 
RHR&TS, Mashobra, Shimla   
 
Crop Number of variety in 
maintenance breeding blocks  Number of variety in reference 
/variety collection blocks  
Apple  276 118 
Pear  79 32 
Cherry  46 21 
 
 Detail of total number of plants maintained in maintenance breeding and variety 
collection block of mandate crops at RHR&TS, Mashobra 
 
Crop Maintenance Breeding Block  Reference Block  Total no. of plants  
Apple 828 563 1391 
Pear 267 272 539 
Cherry 207 132 339 
Total 1302 967 2269 
   
Every year 4-5 varieties of apple, Pear and cherry are being collected and added in the field gene 
bank according to the availability of varieties.  
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 216 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Apple: 
During the year 2021, characterization of 170 viz AAS/GP/BSP/04, AAS/GP/BSP/09, 
AAS/GP/BSP/13, Ace spur, Adams, Akane, Akbar, Ambred, Ambrich, Ambstarking, Antinovika, 
Aurora, Auvil Early Fuji, Aztec Fuji, Baldwin, Beauty of Bath, Early Shanbury,  Belle -d e 
Booskop,  Ballerina,  Bisbee Spu, Black Ben Davis,  Boycan, Braeburn, Bright - N –Early,  
Brookfield Gala,  Bulter's Grieve, Camspur, Carroll, Carpendoo Bianco, Chanpora Selection, 
Chaubatia Ambroise, Chaubatia Anupum, Chaubatia Princ,e Chinese Cinnamon, Co Fuji, 
Commercial, Compact Winter Banana, Cooper- 4, Crimson Gala,  Dessert of Issac, Devenshire 
Quarrenden,  Dorset Golden, Early Red One, EC 349914, EC 539446, EC 539449, EC 539450, 
EC 539457,  
EC83683, EC239451, Ellison's Orange, Eseltine, Empire, Fanny, Fuji, Fuji Kiku, Fuji Raku 
Raku, Fulford Gala, Gala, Gala Mitchella, Gala Must, Galaxy Gala, Giant Jenson, Gloster, Gold 
Rush, Gold Spur, Golden Autumn, Golden Hornet, Golden Reinders, Golden Stark Spur, Granny 
Smith, Green Sleeves, Hardeman, Hardi Brite Spur, Hardispur Honey Gold Honey Sweet, James 
Grieve, Jay Darling, Jeromine, Jona Gold, Jonathan, Jonica, King of Pippins, Lal Ambri, Lal 
Cardinal, Liberty Lobo Lungwort, M. floribunda,  M. robusta, M. baccata,  Maharaji, Manchurain 
Crab, Margrate, McIntosh Double Red, Melrose,  Michael, Mollies Delicious, Neema Earliest, 
Neer Early Staying, Oregon spur, Oregon Spur Canada, Oregon Spur-II, Parkdale, Parlin's Beauty, 
Peas Good Non Such,Pink Lady, Pink Superior, Pommier Aziza, Prima, Priscella, Real Mecoy, 
Red Baron, Red Chief, Red Delicious, Red Flesh, Red Free, Red Fuji, Red Gold, Red June, Red 
Royal, Red Spur, Red Velox, Redlum Gala, Resi CR, Ribiston Pippin, Rich a Red, Rose Marie, 
Royal Delicious, Royal Gala, Rubijon, Rymer, Sansa, Scarlet Gala, Scarlet Spur, Scarlet Spur II, 
Shalimar –  I, Sharp's Late Red, Shireen, Sun Fuji,  Sunheri,  Super Chief, Starkrimson Gold Starr, 
Sukh Trel, Summer Queen, Summer Red, Tallisare, Top Red, Tropical Beauty, Tydeman's Late 
Orange Valley Spur, Vance Delicious, Var. No. 280400, Silver Spur, Spartan Spur, Type Red 
Delicious, Stark Spur Golden, Starkrimson Delicious, Vered, Virgina Crab, Vista Bella, Wellspur, 
Willson's Red June, Winesap Virgina, Worcestor Pearmain, Yellow Delicious, Yellow Newtown, 
York a Red, varieties of the apple maintained in breeding block was done for fruit characters viz;  
Fruit weight (g), Fruit length (mm), Fruit diameter (mm), Fruit L/D ratio, Fruit shape, Fruit 
ribbing, Crowning at calyx end, Fruit eye size (mm), Length of sepal (mm), Bloom of skin, 
Greasiness of skin, Fruit ground colour, Relative area of fruit colour, Hue of over colour, Intensity 
of over colour, Pattern of over colour, Width of stripes, Area of russet around stalk attachment, 
Area of russet around cheeks, Area of russet around eye basin, Number of lenticels (cm2), Size of 
lenticels, Length of stalk (mm), Thickness of stalk (mm), Width of stalk cavity (mm), Depth of 
stalk cavity,(mm), Depth of eye basin (mm), Width of eye basin (mm), Firmness of flesh, Colour 
of flesh and  Appearance of locules. 
 
Pear:  
Vegetative and fruit characterization of following varieties was done during the year 2021.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 217 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Characterization of pear varieties for Vegetative and fruit parameters viz; Tree: vigour, branching, 
habit One year old shoot: growth, One year old shoot apex of vegetative bud, One year old 
shoot: Position of vegetative bud in relation to shoot, One year old shoot : size of bud 
support, Fruit: length, diameter, position of maximum diameter, symmetry (in 
longitudinal section), ground color of skin, relative area of over color, hue of over color, 
relative area of russet on cheeks, length of stalk (cm), thickness of stalk, depth of stalk 
cavity,: orientation  of sepals (at harvest), eye basin (at harvest), depth of eye basin (at 
harvest) and Seed: shape.   
 
In pear only 24 varieties has come into bearing so fruit characterization of following varieties was 
done during the year 2021. 
 
 List of Pear varieties for fruit characterisation during the year 2021 
1. Badshah 13. Monarch 
2. Bargmet 14. Neijiscki  
3. Beure Bosc  15. PI-282935 
4. Carmen 16. Santya Braskaya  
5. Concorde  17. Severenta  
6. Clapp’s Favourite  18. Smart  
7. Doyenne du Comice  19. Starkrimson  
8. Flemish Beauty  20. Taylor Gold  
9. Keiffer 21. Vicar of Winkfield  
10. King’s Pear  22. Virod Anglis  
11. Leconte 23. Warden sickle  
12. Louise Bonne of Jersy  24. William Pear  
      
Cherry:  
During the year 2021, characterization of cherry varieties for fruit characters were done as out of 
46 varieties 43 were in bearing. Whereas, vegetative characterization for leaf character viz; Leaf 
blade: length, width, ratio, shape, angle of apex, angle of base, petiole length, intensity of green 
colour: upper side, leaf petiole: ratio, presence of nectarines and  nectaries colour were done for all 
the varieties planted in field gene bank.    
 
     Leaf, flower and fruit characterization of cherry varieties during the year 2021 
Bedford Prolific  CITH-12 Gaucher Roundal Heart  
Bigarreau Napolean  CITH-13 Germarsdofer  Sam  
Bigarreau Noir Grossa  CITH-14 Glory Seneca  
Black Heart  CITH-15 Guigne Noir Hative  Stella  
Bradbourne Black  CITH-16 Guigne Pourpea Precece  Sunburst  
Celisor  Desna Lapins Sweet Heart  
CITH-1 Durone Nero -I Merchant Triumph Domini  
Annual Report 2021 -22 218 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 CITH-3 Durone Nero -II Merton Glory  Vega  
CITH-4 Durone Nero -III Mora de Cazzana  White Heart 
CITH-5 Early River  Noir de Guben  Van  
CITH-8 Foya Travida  Rainer   
 
      Work done for monograph:  
 
As per advice of PPVFRA, a work on Germplasms conserved at Field Gene Bank was started: 
preliminary work documenting : History of Apple Cultivation, germplasm maintenance and 
evaluation, terminology of morphological characteristics of apple diversity, characterization and 
evaluation of apple varieties with accession code and description and illustration of apple varieties 
for their identification has been completed. Data for correlation, parameters of variability and path 
analysis have been arranged only statistical analysis needs to be done.  
 
 3.4 DR. B.S. KONKAN KRISHI VIDYAPEETH, DAPOLI, MAHARASHTRA 
 
           Varieties under maintenance/characterised: 
 
Sr. No. Crop No. of varieties/Ecotypes under  maintenance  
1. Mango 36 
2. Turmeric                                                    13 Ecotypes 
31 Varieties 
3. Citrus 4 Species 
4. Kachai Lemon 1 
5. Black pepper 6 
6. Banana 46 
7. Nutmeg 4 Varieties 
8. Jackfruit 2 Variety (14 Plants)  
9. Farmers’ varieties 160 
 
a) Collected  and conserved  the following  material in Field Gene Bank 
 
Sr.No. Name of Species No. of germplasm  
collected Source 
1. Mango 20 Varieties RFRS Mango Research Station Vengurla, 
Department  of Horticulture, Dapoli. CES Wakwali, 
Shri. Bhushan  Padmakar  Nabar, Math, Vengurle 
2. Mango 
(Villaikolamban)  280 Plants CES, Wakawli 
Annual Report 2021 -22 219 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 3. Banana 30 Varieties NRC, Tamil Nadu 
4. Citrus 3 Varieties National Research Centre for citrus, Nagpur 
5. Turmeric 38 Varieties Dr. Ashok Chiwate, Agri. Research Station 
Digras  Sangli,  
Indian Institute of Spices Research Farm, 
Peruvannamuzhi,   
Shri Sanjay Jadhav, Badlapur, Maharashtra  
6. Ginger 4 Varieties Dr. Ashok Chiwate, Koregaon, Maharashtra, Agri.  
Research Station Digras Sangli,  
Shri. Shripad  Digamane,  Sangli 
 &  
Shri. Santosh Darekar, Borgaon, 
Satara. 
 
b) Received  and conserved  the following  material in Field Gene Bank 
 
Sr.No. Name of Species  No. of germplasms  
received Source 
1. Banana 8 Varieties Sri Vijayan, President,  Chengalikodan  Banana 
Growers 
Association  Erumaprtty,  Thrissur, Kerala 
2. Kachai Lemon 10 Plants Manipur Centre, Imphal  
3. Jackfruit 2 Varieties PPV & FR Authority,  New Delhi. 
4. Chilli 15 gm Central Costal Agri. Research Institute, Goa 
5. Turmeric 2 Varieties Punjab Agri. University  Ludhiana 
6. Nutmeg 3 Varieties Mr. Jose Mathew, Mr. Varkey Thomman  and 
Mr.Tom C. 
Antony 
7. Planting Material 160 Plants IPR Cell, Kerala Agricultural  University,  Kerala 
8. Yam 5 Varieties Shaji . N. M. Arattuthara  wayanad, Kerala  
9. Planting Material 42 Plants Mr. P. V. Jose, Pullan House, Chalakkudy  
Perambra,  
Pootta, Thrissur Kerala 680722. 
10. Planting Material 21 species Mr. K. R. Jayan, Kaipully Madam, Avittathur,  
Kallettumkara,  Thrissur Kerala 680683. 
 
11.  
Planting Material  
44 species Mr. Raveendran.  R., Reji Bhavan, KRA 172, 
Panachavila  Lane, Ulloor, Medical College P. O., 
Thiruvananthapuram,  Kerala 695011 
12. Planting Material 21 species Mr. K. R. Jayan, Kaipully Madam, Avittathur,  
Kallettumkara,  Thrissur Kerala 680683. 
13. Medicinal  
(Seed material) 1 species  
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 220 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 14. Lime (Plant) 6 plants  
Mr. Prasad , Rama Hedge Kankodlu Village 
Hemmadi  Post, Yellapur Taluk - 581402 
Uttara Kannada District, Karnataka  State India. 15. Lime 
(Scion Material) 4 Species 
16. Lime 
(Seed material) 6 species 
17. Banana 5 Varieties 
18. Dalchini 2 Varieties 
19. Mango 39 Varieties 
20. Black Pepper 5 Varieties 
 
c) Nominated  varieties under DUS Test maintained  in Field Gene Bank 
 
Sr. 
No. Name of 
species Nominated  
name No. of germplasm  
nominated  Source 
 
1.  
Coconut Konkan Bhatye 
Coconut 
Hybrid-1  
30 Nuts Regional Coconut Research 
Station, Bhatye, Ratnagiri 
 
 
3.5 EXTANT VARIETY RECOMMENDATION COMMITTEE (EVRC) MEETINGS   
 
3.5.1  38th EVRC Meeting held on 21st January, 2020 
The 38h EVRC Meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Dr. H.S. Gupta, Former Director, IARI.  
31 applications filed by ICAR Institutes, SAUs and private companies were placed before the 
committee and all are approved. 
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 221 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 4: Projects on the Development of DUS Test Guidelines and 
Establishment of Gene Banks  
 
PROJECTS ON DEVELOPMENT OF DUS TEST GUIDELINES  
Out of 25 Projects proposed the following five projects were considered for funds by PPVFR 
Authority. 
 
S. No.  Title Institute 
1. Purification and Registration of Niche 
specific Rajmash Land Races and farmers 
varieties from Kashmir valley.  SKUAST, Kashmir, Rangreth, KD Farm 
Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir  
2. Development of DUS testing guidelines for 
Pran (Allium x proliferum ) indigenous to 
Kashmir region.  SKUAST, Kashmir, Dassu Pampore, 
Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir  
3. Validation of DUS guidelines for Pran 
(Allium x proliferum ) under Indian 
conditions.  ICAR-CITH, Srinagar, Kashmir  
4. Development of Descriptors for Promoting 
DUS guidelines for Turnip ( Brassica 
rapavar. rapa L.) SKUAST -K, Srinagar, Kashmir  
5. Developement of guidelines to conduct 
DUS test in Bambara Groundnut ( Vigna 
subterranea  (L.) Verdc)  UAS, GKVK, Bangalore, Karnataka  
  
4.1. ON-GOING PROJECTS 
 
4.1.1 TITLE OF THE PROJECT: DEVELOPMENT OF DUS TESTING GUIDELINES FOR 
CHILLI, PAPRIKA AND BELL PEPPER UNDER PROTECTED CONDITIONS  
 
Objective  
 To develop DUS descriptor for chilli, paprika and bell pepper for protected environment 
conditions. 
PI and Institution 
Dr. Akhilesh Sharma, Professor  
Department of Vegetable Science & Floriculture, 
CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya 
Palampur, HP, India PIN 176062 
CO-PIs 
1. Dr. Parveen Sharma, Professor 
 Department of Vegetable Science & Floriculture, Lalbadam  
Badabhaipasand  
Annual Report 2021 -22 222 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya 
 Palampur, HP, India PIN 176062 
2. Dr. Nimit Kumar, Assistant Professor 
 Department of Genetics & Plant Breeding 
 CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya 
 Palampur, HP, India PIN 176062 
Location of project 
Department of Vegetable Science & Floriculture, 
CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya 
Palampur, HP, India PIN 176062 
Brief Technical details  
 Listing of characters for DUS testing  
 46 Reference variety/example variety/common knowledge variety/landraces of targeted crops 
were collected, characterized under protected conditions and based on observations grouping 
of characteristicswas done. These include 30 varieties of chilli, 11 of bell pepper and 5 of 
paprika. 
 These varieties were planted in Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) with three 
replications in June 2021. 
 Submission of descriptor data and DUS characters 
Expected deliverables  
 National guidelines for DUS testing of chilli, paprika and bell pepper under protected 
conditions 
Salient Achievements  
• The observations were recorded for 66 characters for 46 example varieties that include 30 
varieties of chilli, 11 of bell pepper and 5 of paprika.  
• The DUS guidelines for chilli, paprika and bell pepper for field conditions include 54 
characters.  
• The comparative studies indicated variations in state/category for 4 traits (additional category 
proposed) that include  
• Plant height, leaf length of blade, leaf width of blade and fruit cross sectional 
corrugation (oval).  
• In addition, observations were recorded for 10 new traits namely,  
• Anthocyanin colouration of nodes (at active vegetative growth stage), intensity of 
anthocyanin colouration of nodes (at active vegetative growth stage), stem anthocyanin 
colouration, stem anthocyanin colour intensity, petiole colour, petiole length, days to 
Annual Report 2021 -22 223 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 50% flowering after transplanting, style colour, heterostyly, and days to 50% ripening 
after transplanting.  
• Besides, observations for flower and fruit orientation, and number of lobes and number of 
locules were recorded separately due to variations for these traits.  
• The crop duration was longer under protected conditions so there is need to redefine category 
of days to ripening in comparison to open field condition. 
• The report was presented in virtual mode on 2nd March 2022and the suggestions of the 
Hon’ble Chairman shall be taken into consideration while preparing the final report. 
 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 224 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Table 4.1: Details of Expenditure (2021-22) 
Head Allocation 
for the year 
(Rs.) ICAR share of 
expenditure  
(Rs.) State share  Total expenditure 
(Rs.) 
A. Recurring      
1. Manpower  445000/- 100% Nil 243115/- 
2. TA 25000/- 100% Nil - 
3. Recurring 
contingencies  430000/- 100% Nil 378546/- 
Total  9,00,000/ -   6,21,661/ - 
 
4.1.2 NAME OF THE PROJECT: “DEVELOPMENT OF DUS TESTING GUIDELINES FOR 
CHILLI/BELL PEPPER/PAPRIKA UNDER PROTECTED CONDITION” 
a). Details of DUS testing of candidate varieties of Chilli/Bell pepper/ Paprika in Kharif 2022 
Chilli Bell pepper  Paprika 
SI 
No Genotype SI No Genotype SI 
No Genotype SI 
No Genotype 
1 Arka Meghana  20 Kashi Ratna  38 Arka Basant  54 LCA 424 
2 Arka Lohit  21 Kashi Tej  39 HYB-1 55 LCA 436 
3 Arka Harita  22 Kashi Abha  40 YSC-5 56 KtPL-19 
4 Arka Sweta  23 Kashi Gaurav  41 Yolo wonder  57 Byadgi Dabbi  
5 Arka Suphal  24 Kashi Surkh  42 California 
wonder 58 Kashmiri 
Chilli 
6 Punjab Tej  25 Pusa Jwala  43 KTC-1 59 Kashi Sinduri  
7 Punjab Gucchedar  26 Eagle 44 VS-1 60 Paprika 
8 Punjab Sindhuri  27 HyVeg-78 45 Solan Bharpur  61 Arka abhir  
9 CH-52 28 Gagan 46 Orebelle 62 Arka lohit  
10 CH-27 29 Aastha 47 Indera     
11 LCA 334 30 Surajmukhi  48 DDCY-35     
12 LCA 235 31 Him Palam Mirchi -1 49 DDCY-1     
13 LCA 625 32 Him Palam Mirchi -2 50 Arka mohini      
14 LCA 620 33 KBCH 1 51 Arka Gaurav      
15 LCA 305 34 Arka Meghana  52 NS 82     
16 LCA 206 35 Arka Harita  53 NS 292     
17 LCA 353 36 GB local         
18 CA 960 37 Byadgi kaddi          
19 Kashi Anmol              
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 225 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 b). Salient Achievements   
 
Sowing of the above 62 genotypes of chilli/bell pepper/ paprika were carried out on the 
nursery bed. Presently, seedlings are of 35 days old and these seedlings will be transplanted to poly 
house after a week to develop DUS guidelines under protected condition. 
4.1.3 NAME OF THE PROJECT: “DEVELOPMENT OF GUIDELINES TO CONDUCT DUS 
TEST IN BROWNTOP MILLET ( BRACHAERIA RAMOSE L.)” 
 
PI & Institution : Dr. Nagaraja T E, Professor (Plant Breeding) 
AICRP on Small millets, ICAR, GKVK, Bengaluru-560065; E mail: smallmillets@gmail.com  Phone: 
080-23332387 
Progress report 
a). Details of DUS testing of Browntop millet germplasm accessions evaluated in 2021 
Sl. 
No. Genotype  Sl. 
No. Genotype  Sl. 
No. Genotype  
1 KMBT-1 37 TNAU-144 73 TNAU 149  
2 VBTG-2 38 TNAU-115 74 IC617953  
3 IC617957  39 TNAU-121 75 GPUBT 1  
4 TNAU159  40 TNAU-153 76 TNAU-125 
5 TNAU161  41 TNAU-128 77 TNAU-117 
6 TNBR012  42 TNAU-142 78 TNAU-150 
7 IC613558  43 IC617962  79 TNAU-133 
8 BTMNDL -3 44 IC613552  80 TNAU-155 
9 HBR-2 45 VBTG-5 81 TNAU-126 
10 TNAU-160 46 IC613559  82 TNAU-109 
11 VBT-007 47 TNAU-147 83 BIJAPUR 
COLLECTION  
12 GPUBT-2 48 TNAU-113 84 IC617958  
13 TNAU-158 49 TNAU-154 85 TNAU-113 
14 VBTG-6 50 IC617954  86 TNAU-143 
15 VBT-001 51 TNAU-114 87 TNAU-171 
16 VBTG-10 52 TNAU-130 88 IC613554  
17 VBTG-10 53 IC613546  89 IC617961  
18 GPUBT-3 54 TNAU-119 90 IC613546  
19 IC613549  55 IC613555  91 TNAU-164 
20 VBT-004 56 GANIGER 
COLLECTION  92 IC613563  
Annual Report 2021 -22 226 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Sl. 
No. Genotype  Sl. 
No. Genotype  Sl. 
No. Genotype  
21 VBTG-3 57 IC617956  93 TNAU-116 
22 VBTG-7 58 GPUBT-4 94 TNAU-123 
23 VBTG-9 59 TNAU-137 95 TNAU-111 
24 TNAU-164 60 TNAU-145 96 TNAU-139 
25 TNAU-138 61 TNAU-141 97 TNAU-136 
26 VBTG-5 62 TNAU-151 98 GPUBT-6 
27 VBTG-8 63 TNAU-129 99 IC613550  
28 TNAU-169 64 TNAU-135 100 GPUBT-2 
29 TNAU-163 65 IC613556  101 TNAU-120 
30 IC613549  66 TNAU-118 102 IC617959  
31 TNAU-131 67 TNAU-132 103 TNAU-152 
32 GPUBT-7 68 IC613557  104 TNAU-127 
33 IC613562  69 TNAU-162 105 TNAU-110 
34 TNAU-122 70 IC613548  106 TNAU-166 
35 TNAU-134 71 IC613353  107 TNAU-124 
36 GANIGER 
COLLECTION  72 IC613553  108 TNAU-140 
 
b) Salient Achievements  
 
The testing entries in Browntop millet were characterized in replicated trails for DUS traits in Kharif 
2021. Due to excess rainfall the crop failed, hence the same crop was used for purification of seeds. In 
summer 2022, a total of 108 browntop millet germplasm accessions were sown in three replications. 
A row length of 3.0 m, with spacing of 45 x10 cm was followed. A total of 20 characters viz., plant 
growth habit, basal tiller numbers, days to 50% flowering, plant pigmentation at leaf sheath, leaf 
sheath pubescence, ligule pubescence, panicle pubescence, inflorescence shape, peduncle length, flag 
leaf blade length, flag leaf blade width, culm branching, panicle length, panicle compactness, lodging, 
plant height, seed shattering, grain color, grain shape and 1000 grain weight were considered for DUS 
characterization. The seed material of 108 browntop millet germplasm accessions to be sown in 
Kharif 2022 is ready.  Each genotype shall be sown in three replications with spacing of 45 x10 cm 
and row length of 3.0 m each. The genotypes shall be characterized for the above mentioned DUS 
characters. Further, this information shall be used to develop the DUS descriptors.  
 
Representative images of plant growth and panicle compactness evaluated in browntop millet 
germplasm accessions  
Annual Report 2021 -22 227 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Characteristics  Representative image  
 
 
 
Growth habit  
 
Erect  
Decumbent   
Prostrate  
 
 
Panicle 
compactness  
 
Compact  
Semi-compact  
Open 
 
 
 
Plant 
Pigmentation  
 
Presence of pigmentation   
Absence of pigmentation  
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 228 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 4.1.4 NAME OF THE PROJECT:  "DEVELOPMENT OF DESCRIPTORS FOR 
PROMOTING DUS GUIDELINES FOR KNOL KHOL ( BRASSICA OLERACEA VAR. 
GONGYLODES L.) INDIGENOUS TO KASHMIR REGION " 
 
Name of the institution: Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Science & 
Technology (K) Shalimar- 190025, Srinagar (J&K) 
Year of Commencement: 2021-22 
Duration of the project: Two years 
Total budget of the project: 18 lakhs 
Principal Investigator: Dr. Baseerat Afroza, Professor, Division of Vegetable 
Science, SKUAST- K, Shalimar, Srinagar 
Co- Principal Investigators: 1. Dr. Rizwan Rashid, Assistant Professor, Division 
of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-K, 
Shalimar, Srinagar 
2. Dr. Zahoor Ahmad Dar, Professor (Genetics 
and Plant Breeding), Dryland Agriculture 
Research Station, SKUAST-K Shalimar 
Broad Objectives of the project: 
⚫ Collection  of Knol khol germplasm.  
⚫ Characterization  of Knol khol accessions  for development  of DUS descriptors.  
⚫ Development  of DUS test guidelines.  
 
Accomplishments during year 2021-22 
1. Collection  of Knol khol  germplasm.  
a) Total no. of collection sites: 196 
b) Number of germplasm lines  collected: 263 (10 lines failed to germinate)  
 Districts visited for germplasm collection:   
Srinagar, Ganderbal, Baramulla, Kupwara, Bandipore,  Anantnag, Pulwama, Shopian, Budgam , 
Kulgam 
Table 4.2: Details of Collection from ICAR institutes/ SAU’s: 
S. 
No. Institution  No. of germplasm  lines 
obtained 
1. IARI, Regional Vegetable  Research Station, Katrain, Kulla, White Vienna, Pusa Virat 
 H.P.  
2. Division of Vegetable  Science and Floriculture,  SKUAST - G-40 
 Jammu  
Annual Report 2021 -22 229 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
3. Division of Vegetable  Science and Floriculture,  CSK Palam Tender 
  
Himachal Pradesh Agricultural  University,  Palampur  
4. National Bureau of Plant Genetic  Resources,  Pusa, New  
Delhi IC- 411761, IC - 537818,  
IC- 369512, IC - 060500, 
IC- 411798, IC - 0537822,  
IC- 0539756, IC - 539771. 
 
   
 
   
Aramppora, Baramulla Shuhama, Ganderbal Maloora, Srinagar 
  
 
Dedikot, Kupwara Izmarg, Gurez Sumbal, bandipora 
Some of the places explored for germplasm collection 

Annual Report 2021 -22 230 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Diversity existing among germplasm collections 
 
2. Characterization  of Knol khol accessions  for development  of DUS descriptors.  
 
a) Nursery was laid out in open field, raised beds were prepared with the dimensions  
of 3m x1mx 0.15 m and seeds of all germplasm lines were sown on 09 -08-2021. 
Adequate care  was taken  to raise a healthy nursery. 
 
b) Well developed and healthy seedlings were transplanted from 09 -09-21 to 16-09- 
21 in well prepared land  with the spacing of  30 x30 cm.  
 
   Table 4.3: Observations were recorded on following traits: 
S. No. Descriptor Trait Score/ observation 
1. Leaf attitude Erect, Semi - erect, Horizontal  
2. Leaf blade size Small, Medium, Large 
3. Leaf shape Narrow ovate, Ovate, Broad ovate 
4. Leaf Crenation Present or Absent 
Annual Report 2021 -22 231 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 5. Leaf Dentation Present or Absent 
6. Leaf Sinuation Present or Absent 
7. Leaf tip Narrow acute,  Acute, Obtuse, Round, Broadly round 
8. Foliage colour Yellow green, Light green, Dark green, Blue green, Violet 
green 
9. Formation  of crown Weak, Medium, Strong 
10. Leaf area Small, Medium, Large 
11. Internodal  length Small, Medium, Large 
12. Leaf puckering Weak, Medium, Strong 
13. Colour of Midrib and  
veins White green, Yellow green, Pale violet, Dark violet 
14. Waxiness Present or Absent 
15. Leaf angle with stem Acute, Right, Obtuse  
16. Petiole length Small, Medium, Large 
17. Petiole colour White green, Yellow green, Pale violet, Dark violet 
18. Number of leaf whirls  Less, average, high 
19. Number of leaves Less, average, high 
20. Plant height Short, medium, high  
21. Knob shape Round, Oval, Flattened,  
22. Knob colour White green, Yellow green, Pale violet, Dark violet 
23. Flesh colour From RHS colour chart 
24. Knob size Small, Medium, Large 
25. Shape of knob apex Concave, Plane, Convex 
26. Lignification  Early, Medium, Late 
27. Knob splitting Present or Absent 
 
The crop was harvested during the month of November, 2021. Due to presence of 
duplications in the morphological traits, only 60 selections with distinct traits were 
carried further for seed production. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 232 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
Diversity in knob shape and size 
Diversity in leaf shape, size and colour 
 
                                                                       

Annual Report 2021 -22 233 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 4.1.5  NAME OF THE PROJECT/CENTER:  "DEVELOPMENT OF DUS TEST 
GUIDELINES FOR LETTUCE DUS-24 -767 (TG3648), IARI, NEW DELHI"  
 
1. Name of Nodal/Co-Nodal Officer:   Dr. Yvonne Angel Lyngdoh, Scientist, Division of 
Vegetable Science, IARI, New Delhi 
 
2. Contact  Details: Division of Vegetable Science, IARI, New Delhi  
E mail:  yvonnelyngdoh@yahoo.com   Phone: 9718810724   
  
3. Mandated Crop species:   Lettuce 
 
 During the year 2021-22 DUS characterzization of Lettuce ( Lactuca sativa  L.) was 
undertaken by the Division of Vegetable Science, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, Pusa New Delhi. During the first year 15 varieties/advanced breeding lines were 
collected from different Institutes/Universities and from the Division of Vegetable Science 
for DUS characterization which is presented in Table 4.4 . 
 
Table 4.4.  Source of Lettuce entries 
 
Sl 
No  Name of the Institute/University  Variety/Breeding l ines  
1.  ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, Regional Station Katrain  Great Lakes  
Chinese Yellow  
2.  Dr Y S Parmar University of 
Horticulture and Forestry,  Solan  Alamo-1  
Solan Kriti  
3.  Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidaypeeth 
(MPKV), Rahuri  Phule Padma  
4.  ICAR – Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi  8 advanced breeding lines (DLS 13, DLS 50, DLS 
90, DLS 1 -15, Red Salad, Harit Baingani, 
Iceberg)  
5.  Seed markets  3 (Tango, Red Romaine, Red Rose)  
 
 The trial was laid out as per the DUS testing guidelines. The varieties/lines were evaluated in 
RBD design with three replications and 60 plants in each replication. The seeds were sown 
in 14.10.2021 and seedlings were transplanted in 22.11.2021 at a spacing of 45 × 30 cm. 
 
 35 agro-morphological characters for DUS testing of lettuce were selected and data was 
recorded during the seedling stage, harvesting stage and flowering stage (Table 4.5).  
 
 Out of these lines, 3 heading (Great Lakes, Alamo 1 and Iceberg), 10 leafy (Chinese Yellow, 
Phule Padma, Solan Kriti, DLS 13, DLS 50, DLS 90, DLS 123, DLS 1-15), one butterhead 
(Harit Baingani)  and one romaine/cos types have been identified (Table 4.6 ). 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 234 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Monitoring at ICAR- Indian Agricultural Research Institute was done on 30.12.2021 
 
Table  4.5. List of morphological characters taken 
Seedling stage  Harvesting stage  Flowering stage  
Anthocyanin at 
cotyledon stage  Plant type, plant diameter, plant 
weight, plant height number of leaves, 
head size head compactness, head 
weight, head shape, stem anthocyanin, 
outer leaf, leaf attitude, leaf division, 
leaf shape, leaf shape at apex, leaf 
longitudinal shape, leaf lobe, leaf 
anthocyanin, leaf anthocyanin area, leaf 
colour, leaf intensity of green colour, 
leaf glossiness, leaf thickness, le af 
blister, leaf undulation of margin, leaf 
incision of margin, leaf venation, leaf 
covering head  Bolting of 50% plant colour 
of flower, anthocyanin in 
flower, distribution of 
anthocyanin, number of 
ligules in flower, seed 
colour, plant height at 
flowering stage 
 
Table 4.6.  Characterization of different lettuce genotypes S.No 
Geno 
type 
Plant type  
Leaf attitude  
Leaf sha pe  
Leaf shape at 
apex 
Leaf long  
itudinal 
shape 
Leaf lobes  
Leaf antho - 
cyanin 
Leaf  antho 
cyanin 
area 
Leaf colour  
Leaf intensity of 
green colour 
Leaf glossi  
ness 
 Leaf thick  
ness 
 Leaf blister  
 
Leaf undulation 
of margin  
 
Leaf incision of 
margin 
 Leaf vena  
tion 
 Leaf covering 
head 
 
Head compact  
ness 
Head shape  
 
Color of flower  
 
Anthocyanin in 
flower 
 Stem 
Anthocyanin  
 
Heading type  
1 Great 
lakes H SE MO O
BC CON
V A A A G M M TK M A A N
F S S B
E/
C D
Y A A 
2 Alam
o-1 H E BO O
BC CON
C A A A G M W TK S P IR 
D F
L
B S/M M/
S/
L C/
B
E Y A A 
3 Ice 
berg H E BO O
BC CON
C A A A G LG S
M TK M P IR
D N
F - - - Y A A 
Leafy type  
4 DlS 
50 L
F E BO O
BC CON
V M P P P
R L M TK S P R
D F
L
B - - - P
R P LP 
5 Phule 
Padm
a L
F SE NE O
B CON
V A A A G LG M M SM A A N
F - - - Y A A 
6 DLS 
90 L
F E ME O
B F A P P L
P LG M TN SM A A N
F - - - Y P LP 
7 Red 
salad L
F E NE/
OB
L O
B F A P P D
R
P VL ST TN SM P CR N
F - - - Y P DP 
8 Red 
rose L
F SE OB
O O
BC CON
V A P P D
B A ST L ST P IR
D F
L
B - - - Y P P 
9 Solan 
Kriti L
F E OB
L/N
E O
BT F A A A G M M M SM A CR N
F - - - Y A A 
10 DlS 
13 L
F SE OB
O O
BC CON
V A A A G
Y L L TK SM P IR
D F
L
B - - - D
Y A A 
11 DLS 
1-15 L
F E BO O
BC F A P P D
P VL ST TK ST P CR F
L
B - - - Y P P 
Annual Report 2021 -22 235 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 12 Tang
o L
F SE OB
O O
BC CON
V A A A D
G ST L TK M P IR
D F
L
B - - - Y A A 
13 Chine
se 
Yello
w L
F E ME O
B F A A A Y
G LG W M SM A A N
F - - - Y A A 
Butterhead type  
14 Harit 
Baing
ani B
H E ME O
B F A P P B
P LG M M A A A N
F - - - Y P LP 
Cos/Romaine type  
15 Red 
romai
ne B
H E BR
O O
BT F A P P B
P VL ST TN M P CR N
F - - - Y P P 
 
 
  
Fig 1. General view of the experimental plot 
 
 
                 Great Lakes                           Alamo-1                                       Iceberg 
Fig 2. Heading types of Lettuce 
 
       
                  Solan Kriti                                DLS 13                                    DLS 50 
Fig 3. Leafy types of Lettuce 
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 236 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 4.1.6 Project on “ Development of DUS test guidelines for Mesta (H. cannabinus ) and Roselle (H. 
sabdariffa )” 
 
 ICAR-CRIJAF, West Bengal and ANGRAU ARS-Agricultural Research Station, 
Amadalavalasa, Srikakulam are working on to develop the DUS test 
guidelines for Mesta and Roselle. During entire crop growing 
season, a total of 30 characters (Hypocotyl Pigmentation, 
Cotyledonary leaf pigmentation, Leaf blade lobe number, Incision 
of leaf margin, Leaf vein colour, Leaf petiole colour, Leaf collar 
colour, Leaf shape, Leaf length width ratio, Leaf blade angle, 
Stipule colour, Stem colour, Stem pubescence, Presence of spine on 
stem, Density of spine on stem,  Plant height, Days to 50% 
flowering, Flower bud colour, Flower petal colour, Flower eye zone colour, Flower eye zone 
extension, Late stem colour, Fruit pigmentation, Fruit 
pubescence, Capsule dehiscence, Seed shape,  Seed coat 
colour, Thousand seed weight, fiber fineness and fibre 
strength )  were recorded. Among these characters studied 
22 characters in roselle and 19 characters in kenaf were 
found to be useful establishing distinctness of varieties. 
However, stability of these characters will be checked over season and location. Seeds of all 
varieties/lines have been multiplied for sowing in the upcoming season. The centres are managing 
14 germplasm/varieties in Kenaf and 16 in Roselle. 
 
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 237 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 5: Activities Related to Farmers  
 
5.1 TRAINING- CUM-AWARENESS PROGRAMMES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2 FARMER TRAINING- CUM-AWARENESS PROGRAMME: 
 
The Authority has conducted 1 training-cum-awareness programme for farmers under 
PPVFR Act, 2001 in Assam State. In the above programme, officer from Authority participated 
and delivered talk on Farmers’ Rights and PPVFR Act, 2001. 
 
An awareness programme on ‘Protection of Plant Varieties and Famers’ Rights Act, 2001’  
was organized in collaboration with Directorate of Research, Assam Agricultural University on 
27th March, 2022. More than 100 farmers attended the programme. During the lecture, the 
importance of landraces, their conservation and farmers varietal registration procedure with 
PPVFRA, New Delhi was elaborated. Plant Genome Saviour Awards conferred by the authority 
for the conservation efforts were highlighted; brochures of PPVFRA were distributed. Also, 
different crop varieties brought by the farmers were showcased along with their utilities and 
unique traits were described for the communities. 
 
5.3 PLANT GENOME SAVIOUR AWARDS/REWARDS/RECOGNITION: 
Plant Genome Saviour Awards Ceremony on 21st November, 2021 at AP Shinde Auditorium, 
NASC Complex, New Delhi 110012. 
 
Sh Narendra Singh Tomar, Hon’ble 
Union Minister for Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, Government of India conferred Plant 
Genome Saviour Community Awards to four 
communities for the year 2016-17, 2018-19, 
and 2019-20; Plant Genome Saviour Farmer 
Rewards to 15 farmers and Plant Genome 
Saviour Farmer Recognition to 8 farmers 
respectively from different states of India for 
the year 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20. Smt. 
Shobha Karandlaje and Shri Kailash 
Choudhary, Minister(s) of State for Training cum awareness programmes & others activities organized during 2021 -22  
S.NO ACTIVITIES  2021-22 Total 
1 Awareness Programme  1 1 
2 Exhibition & Fair  4 4 
3 Seminar 4 4 
 G. Total 09 

Annual Report 2021 -22 238 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India; Shri Sanjay Agarwal, Secretary, DAFW, 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India; Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra, 
Secretary, DARE, Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Government of India & Director 
General, ICAR; Dr. K.V. Prabhu, 
Chairperson, PPVFR Authority, 
Government of India graced the 
occasion. An exhibition showcased 
the agro biodiversity being conserved 
by the Awardees. In his address to the 
audience of Farmers, Scientist, Policy 
makers, Govt. officials, Press and 
Media, Hon’ble Union Agriculture 
Minister congratulated the awardees 
and urged that the traditional communities/farmers who are conserving biodiversity, medicinal 
plants, should be encouraged and suitably awarded. The function was held on Nov 11, 2021 at AP 
Shinde Auditorium, NASC Complex, New Delhi 110012  
 
5.3.1. Plant Genome Saviour Community Award: This Award consist of Rs. 10 Lakhs, 
Citation and Memento. 
 
For Years 2016-17:  
 
Kalsubai Parisar Biyane Savardhan Samajik Sanstha, Akole, Khirvire, Ahmednagar, Maharashtra-411058  
  
 
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 239 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 For Years 2018-19: 
Nattu Manchottil Educational and Indigenous Fruit Plants Conservation and Research Trust, Kannur 
District- 670301, Kerala 
 
 
 
 
Red Rice Farmers of Rohru Shimla-171207, Himachal Pradesh  
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 240 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 For Years 2019-20: 
  
Dansuri Agril Farming Co-operative Society Karbi Anglong,   Assam-782470  
 
 
 
 
Bhoomi Sustainable Development Society (R), Hassan, Karnataka-573201  
 

Annual Report 2021 -22 241 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 5.3.2 Plant Genome Saviour Farmer Reward: This Reward consists of Rs. 1.5 Lakhs, Citation 
and Memento.  
 
 
For years 2017- 18: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Years 2018-19:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sh. Bandhana Oraon  
Jharkhand  Smt. Mamtabai Deor am 
Bhangre,Ahmednagar,  
Maharashtra  Sh. Deendayal Yadav  
Champa, Chhattisgarh  
Sh. S. Boregowda  
Mandya Taluk, Karnataka  Sh. Dattatraya Nanasaheb 
Kale 
Solapur, Maharashtra  Sh. Sanjay Prakash 
Choudhary  
Balod, Chhattisgarh  
Sh. M.V. Prakash Rao  
Shivamogga, Karanataka  Sh. Sathyanarayana 
Beleri 
Kasaragod, Kerala  
Annual Report 2021 -22 242 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 For Years 2019-20: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Linguram Thakur  
Bijapur, Chhattisgarh  Sh. Mohammed  Idris Ahmed 
Quadri 
Bidar, Karnataka  Sh. Vallabhbhai Vasrambhai  
Junagadh, Gujarat  
Sh. Hetram 
Devangan  
Janjgir, Chhattisgarh  Sh. Prem Singh 
Chauhan 
Shimla, Himachal 
Pradesh  Sh. Katrahalli Kallappa  
Vijayanagara, Karnataka  
Sh. Poonacha N.  
Kodagu, Karnataka  
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 243 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 5.3.3 Plant Genome Saviour Farmer Recognition: This Reward consists of Rs. 1 Lakhs, 
Citation and Memento.  
 
For year 2017-18: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Years 2018-19: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Years 2019- 
 
Sh. Shivagouda M Patil  
Belagavi, Karnataka  Sh. K.T. Vedamurthy  
Chitradurga, Karnataka  Sh. S.S. Paramesh  
Tumakuru, 
Karnataka  Sh. Aloke Kumar Das  
Hoogly, West Bengal  
Sh. Kalluvellil Verky George  
Palakkad, Kerala - Sh. Srinivas Murthy  
Shivamoga -577202, 
Karnataka  
Annual Report 2021 -22 244 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Sh. Boloram Sarongsa  
Anglong , Assam  Sh. Reji Joseph  
Pathanamthitta, Kerala  
Annual Report 2021 -22 245 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
6.1 PLANT VARIETY JOURNAL OF INDIA 
 
In accordance with Rule 2(g) of PPVFR Rules, 2003 the Authority publishes its official 
journal “Plant Variety Journal of India” (PVJ) as a monthly publication and made available to 
public each month on its official website. This journal has the equivalent status of a Gazette under 
the PPVFR Regulations, 2006. The contents of Journal includes official and public notices, 
Gazette notifications, passport data of plant varieties along with photographs, published DUS test 
guidelines of different crop species, details of certificate of registration and other related official 
matters and notices. 
 
Table 6.1: Number of Varieties advertised in Plant Variety Journal inviting opposition during 
the year 2021-22  
S. 
No. Category of 
variety No. of 
variety Crop Application received 
From-To 
1. Farmer 166 Rice, Orchid, Soybean, Bread 
wheat, Cauliflower, Chickpea, 
Ridge gourd, Linseed, Mango, 
Muskmelon, Lentil, Sorghum, 
Pearl millet, Bottle gourd, Bitter 
gourd, Barley, Chickpea, 
Maize, Rapeseed,  Grapes, 
Brinjal and Soybean  20.07.2009 – 26.08.2020  
2 New 83 Rice, Maize, Potato, Tetraploid 
cotton, Barley, Okra, 
Muskmelon, Durum wheat, 
Tomato, Brinjal, Sorghum, 
Casuarinas, Eucalyptus, Pearl 
millet and Rose  13.04.2009 – 10.06.2020  
3 Extant 95 Tetraploid cotton, Rice, 
Menthol mint, Bitter gourd, 
Bottle gourd, Bread wheat, 
Brinjal, Maize, Tuberose, Okra, 
Ridge gourd, Sorghum, 
Chickpea, Pigeon pea, Green 
gram, Black gram, Durum 
wheat, Garden pea, Kidney 
bean, Barnyard millet, Cowpea, 
Grapes, Rose,  Onion, 
Sunflower and Tomato  15.02.2008 – 18.03.2021  Chapter 6: Plant Variety Journal of India, National Register of Plant 
Varieties and Publications of the Authority  
Annual Report 2021 -22 246 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 6.2 NATIONAL REGISTER OF PLANT VARIETIES 
 
The PPVFR Authority, in compliance with section 13 of the 
PPVFR Act, 2001, has opened the National Register of Plant 
Varieties at the Headquarters of the Plant Varieties Registry.  It 
contains complete details of the names of all the registered plant 
varieties along with the names and addresses of the respective 
breeders, denomination, specifications, salient features etc.   
 
 
 
Table 6.2: Number of Varieties entered in the National Register of Plant Varieties during the 
year 2021-22  
S. No. Category of variety  No. of variety  
1. New 137 
2. Farmers 128 
3. Extant (N)  156 
4. Extat (VCK)  54 
Total  475 
 
Public 169 
Private 178 
Farmers 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 247 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 7: Development of Database, IINDUS, NORV, Website and 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  
 
7.1 WEBSITE: 
 
The new official website (www.plantauthority.gov.in) of the Protection of Plant Varieties and 
Farmers’ Rights Authority (PPVFRA) has been deployed on NIC cloud server. The website is 
developed in bilingual 
(Hindi and English) 
using latest 
technology. The New 
website has 
compliance with all 
the GIGW norms with 
mobile compatibility 
set for the 
government. The 
website has obtained 
Website Quality Certification from STQC (Standardization Testing Quality Certification). The 
website has developed by NIC. The website has featured with MIS report in graphic view for 
registration certificates issued and important information about incoming events, PGSC award and 
other functions. The public notice, important orders and other significant information has 
published regular basis. The quick online tracking status system for registration applications on the 
website has also incorporated. It is a dynamic mode search page in which applicant can search its 
application status 
either their 
Acknowledgement 
number or by 
denomination or 
Name of applicant. 
This page 
information made 
more user friendly by 
adding new field 
corresponding 
address and present status, so that Applicant would easily find current status of application on 
short span of time. It is very feasible to view and print the status report. This web page is 
compatible with all web browsers. 
 
The new official website (www.plantauthority.gov.in) of the Protection of Plant Varieties and 
Farmers’ Rights Authority(PPVFRA) has been launched Online Payment through SBI Collect 
Interface. The Payment of Registration fee, All type of DUS Test Fee, Annual fee, Renewal fee 
etc. 

Annual Report 2021 -22 248 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
 
7.2 ONLINE TRACKING OF APPLICATION STATUS: 
 
The Authority has developed the online tracking system of 
applications on the website. It is a dynamic mode search page 
in which applicant can search its application status either their 
Acknowledgement number or by denomination or Name of 
applicant. This page information made more user friendly by 
adding new field corresponding address and present status, so 
that Applicant would easily find current status of application 
on short span of time. It is very feasible to view and print the 
status report. This web page is compatible with all web 
browsers. 
 
 
7.3 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) 
 
The Authority also invites tenders on Central Public procurement portal 
(https://eprocure.gov.in/eprocure/app), purchase for Authority is taken from GeM (Government E-
Marketplace), update General Pool Residential Accommodation (http://gpra.nic.in/gpra), quarterly 
reports of RTIs (http://dsscic.nic.in/users/pn-login), New Pension System Contributions 
Accounting System (https://npscan-cra.com/CRA/), Representation of Reserved Categories in 
Posts and Services in Govt. of India Monitoring System (http://www.rrcps.nic.in/). The Authority 
is also trying to fulfill the concept of national e-governance and has taken initiatives in this regard. 
  

Annual Report 2021 -22 249 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 7.4 ONLINE FILING OF APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION: 
 
The Authority initiated registration of 12 crop species in 2007 which has been extended to 172 
crop species at present. Authority is accepting the applications filled by the applicants along with 
prescribed fee (fee deposited in the form of demand drafts) either by hand or by postal service. 
Development of online process for submission of applications and payment for registration 
process of plant varieties will facilitate the applicants to file their applications in online mode to 
the Authority and also to pay the prescribed fee through ‘Payment Gateway’ which may be either 
through Debit card/Credit card/Net Banking. The system is now being implanted by NIC/NICSI 
and development of software is in almost final stage.  
The following feature available in the Online filing software:  
 On line management and processing of the applications for the Grant of rights to breeder & 
farmers.  
 Real-time notification and communication between stakeholders like Applicants and Plant 
Varieties Registry to enhance user experience.  
 The scrutiny of applications for grant of PVP to be done more effectively using the on-line 
tools thereby reducing time.  
 The monitoring of the DUS Test Results shall be more effective, accurate and reduc e 
processing time.  
 Dashboard of the entire application to monitor the process, check status and progress in 
real-time.  
 MIS Module for Generating various reports related to the applications.  
 Send email and SMS to respective registered user to enter/update the relevant information.  
The Online filing application software is almost completed and currently under testing phase 
after successfully testing application the application will be launch in the public domain by the 
authority.   

Annual Report 2021 -22 250 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 
 
7.5 PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (PFMS) 
 
The Authority has implemented PFMS, Digital Payment 
Systems and e-payment like RTGS/NEFT.  The Authority 
discourages off-line payment system like deposition of cash 
in the different accounts of Authority.  The Authority has 
been shifted on e-payment systems like PFMS and other 
digital payments.  The list of institutes mapped in PFMS is 
here under  
 
MAPPED IN PFMS SCHEME 3025  
S. 
No. Agency Name  Agency Type  
1 Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University  Statutory Bodies  
2 Agriculture University, Jodhpur  Statutory Bodies  
3 Assam Agricultural University  State Government Institutions  
4 ATARI Guwahati  Central Government  
5 ATARI Patna  Central Government  
6 Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya  Statutory Bodies  
7 Bihar Agricultural University, Sabour 
Bhagalpur  Statutory Bodies  
8 Birsa Agricultural University, Kanke, Ranchi, 
Jharkhand  State Government PSUs  
9 C.S. Azad University of Agriculture & 
Technology, Kanpur  Statutory Bodies  
10 CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar  Statutory Bodies  
11 Central Agricultural Research Institute, Port 
Blair Central Government  
12 Central Institute of Temperate Horticulture 
Srinagar (ICAR)  Central Government  
13 Central Coffee Research Institute - Balehonnur  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
14 Central Institute for Arid Horticulture, Bikaner  Central Government  
15 Central Institute for Cotton Research Nagpur 
(Unit of ICAR)  Central Government  
16 Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture  Central Government  
17 Central Plantation Crops Research Institute  Central Government  
Annual Report 2021 -22 251 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 18 Central Potato Research Institute  Central Government  
19 Central Research Institute for Jute and Allied 
Fibres Central Government  
20 Central Rice Research Institute  Central Government  
21 Central Tobacco Research Institute  Central Government  
22 Central Tuber Crops Research Institute  Central Government  
23 CIMAP Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
24 Comptroller, Maharana Pratap University of 
Agriculture and Technology, Udaipur  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
25 CSR&TI Mysore  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
26 Directorate of Cashew Research (Formerly 
National Research Centre For Cashew)  Central Government  
27 Directorate of Groundnut Research (ICAR Unit)  Central Government  
28 Directorate of Maize Research  Central Government  
29 Directorate of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants  Central Government  
30 Directorate of Oilseeds Research, 
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad  Central Government  
31 Directorate of Rice Reserach  Central Government  
32 Directorate of Seed Research, Uttar Pradesh  Central Government  
33 Directorate of Soybean Research (Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research)  Central Government  
34 Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
35 Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Akola State Government PSUs  
36 Dr.Y.S. Parmar University of Horticulture and 
Forestry State Government Institutions  
37 G.B. Pant University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Pant Nagar  Statutory Bodies  
38 Icar- Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute  Central Government  
39 ICAR- Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute, Kanpur  Central Government  
40 ICAR Directorate of Onion and Garlic Research  Central Government  
41 ICAR- IIWBR (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research- Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley 
Research)  Central Government  
42 ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region  Central Government  
Annual Report 2021 -22 252 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 43 ICAR Research Complex, Goa, (Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research)  Central Government  
44 ICAR Unit Drmr (Directorate of Rapeseed -
Mustard Research)  Central Government  
45 ICAR, ATARI -III Central Government  
46 ICAR, NRC For Orchids  Central Government  
47 ICAR-Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute, Hyderabad  Central Government  
48 ICAR-Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute, Jabalpur  Central Government  
49 ICAR-Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute, Pune  Central Government  
50 ICAR-Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute, Zone -I Central Government  
51 ICAR-ATARI Kolkata  Central Government  
52 ICAR-ATARI, Bangalore  Central Government  
53 ICAR-National Research Centre on 
Pomegranate (NRCP), Solapur  Central Government  
54 Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute  Central Government  
55 Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute  Central Government  
56 Indian Institute of Horticultural Research  Central Government  
57 Indian Institute of Millets Research Central Government  
58 Indian Institute of Pulses Research  Central Government  
59 Indian Institute of Spices Research (ICAR)  Central Government  
60 Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, 
Lucknow Central Government  
61 Indian Instute of Vegetable Research (ICAR)  Central Government  
62 Indian Society of Seed Technology  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
63 Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur.  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
64 Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding 
(Indian Council of Forestry Research and 
Education)  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
65 Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwavidyalaya  Statutory Bodies  
66 Junagadh Agricultural University  State Government Institutions  
67 Kerala Agricultural University  State Government PSUs  
68 M S Swaminathan Research Foundation  Trusts 
69 Mahatma Phule Agricultural University, Rahuri  State Government Institutions  
70 Nagaland University  Statutory Bodies  
71 Narendra Deva University of Agriculture & 
Technology, Kumarganj, Faizabad  State Government Institutions  
Annual Report 2021 -22 253 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 72 National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
73 National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resource - 
NBPGR (ICAR)  Central Government  
74 National Research Center for Litchi  Central Government  
75 National Research Centre for Banana (ICAR)  Central Government  
76 National Research Centre for Citrus, Nagpur 
(Unit of ICAR)  Central Government  
77 National Research Centre for Grapes (ICAR)  Central Government  
78 National Research Centre on Seed Spices  Central Government  
79 Navsari Agricultural University  State Government PSUs  
80 North-East Institute of Science & Technology 
(CSIR) Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
81 Prof. Jayashankar Telangana State Agricultural 
University, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad  State Government Institutions  
82 Punjab Agricultural University  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
83 Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture 
Technology And Sciences State Government PSUs  
84 Sardar Krushinagar Dantiwada Agricultural 
University  State Government PSUs  
85 Sher-E-Kashmir University of Agricultural 
Sciences and Technology of Kashmir  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
86 Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, 
Jobner State Government Institutions  
87 Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore, 
(ICAR) Central Government  
88 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
89 Tea Board DTR& DC,Kurseong  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
90 Tea Research Association  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
91 University of Agricultural and Horticultural 
Sciences, Shivamogga  Statutory Bodies  
92 University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore  Statutory Bodies  
93 University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad  Registered Societies (Govt., 
Autonomous Bodies)  
94 University of Horticultural Sciences, Bagalkot  Statutory Bodies  
95 VPKAS(ICAR), Almora  Central Government  
96 ICAR- Indian Agriculture Research Institute  Central Government  
 
   
Annual Report 2021 -22 254 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 8: Administration, Governance and Other Miscellaneous 
Activities  
 
8.1 ADMINISTRATION: 
 
 
8.1.1 MANPOWER: 
  
During the period under report, Shri Arun Kumar, Legal Advisor assumed the charges of 
Legal Advisor in PPVFR Authority on 07.09.2021.  
The Authority advertised for the post of Registrar-General, Registrar and Joint Registrar. 
In addition to this the Authority has submitted a detailed proposal to DAFW for creation of 136 
new posts during the period under report. At the time of submission of this report, the positions of 
two Registrars of the three approved posts and that of Registrar General are vacant. Manpower in 
the form of Registrar and Registrar-General is most crucial and have to be in position mandatorily 
for the implementation of the provisions of the Act including registration of the varieties, judicial 
proceedings on any appeals or objections or petitions. These statutory roles cannot be executed by 
any other officer or temporary officers given the charge.  
The posts of Registrar (two out of three vacant currently) and Joint Registrar are not being 
filled despite three advertisements during the year under report following four times in the past 
two years and one more since then, which did not find any takers so far. The reasons of why these 
posts are not being filled by the qualified professional scientists and technical professionals in the 
areas of plant variety development from public system in national agricultural research system is 
that the status of these positions are one to two levels lower than the qualified potential applicants. 
Under no circumstances the experience can be shortened as the job execution requires tremendous 
resolve, understanding and a standing in the field of expertise to hear senior advocates and 
breeders while passing orders or imposing restrictions etc. The only option left is to have the 
positions upgraded and the number enhanced to deal with more than 11000 of the 17000 
applications in the pendency list.  
Conflict of Interest : As of now, all technical positions that deal with the registration process 
including the Registrar General, Registrar, Joint Registrar, Deputy Registrar are all invariably 
placed under Deputation only through an amendment made in June 2015. It is not in natural justice 
to believe the registry which deals with confidential information as well as judicial action on 
applications till grant of rights or its denial shall do it independent of any conflict of interest 
favouring the parent organization which has applied for a claim of right or bias in favour of his 
senior colleague in the discipline or also his own group or organization in delivering an order or 
decision that can only be settled in an High Court. When such important responsibility is assigned, 
person who carries out such responsibility cannot be put in a natural dilemma of his or her fate 
when he joins back his organization. This can be avoided only by direct recruitment and career 
advancement in the same line with the national agricultural research system.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 255 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Early termination of commercial or evolutionary life of a variety as a consequence of delay 
in completion of registration due to shortage of qualified staff:  Plant varieties are live 
specimens unlike the subjects in other other IPR granting authorities in the country where there is 
no such thing involved as biological or evolutionary life span of the plant. While only innovation’s 
life span till a new innovation overtakes the old one is the catch point in the other claims in other 
IPR Authorities, in the case of plant varieties, both innovation of a variety being better performer 
as well as the consistency of life span without disintegration due to evolutionary pressure faced in 
each life cycle of seed to seed become affected by every season of delay.  This cannot be justified 
by way of being understaffed as the purpose does not get served in encouraging innovative 
breeders to competitively invest to breed better plant varieties.  
A detailed proposal for the upgradation of positions, changed recruitment method to direct 
recruitment with career advancement has been proposed for a total of 164 positions in the 
Authority which is under consideration since last three years in the Government which is expected 
to be taken to due logical conclusion as desired by the Government taking into consideration the 
provisions in the Act and the funcitons to be carried out by the Authority in compliance.    
 
8.2 LEGAL CELL  
The Legal Cell of the Authority has successfully defended all cases filed against the Authority. 
Further in case of quasi-judicial proceedings before the Registry and Authority, legal inputs were 
rendered and daily order sheets were dispatched to the parties promptly.  The Legal Cell of the 
Authority is LIMBS (Legal Information Management & Briefing System) compliant and the 
progress of the cases are updated regularly and monitored in LIMBS. During the reporting period, 
33cases were pending against the Authority.   
 
 Table 8.1: The details of forum and number of cases pending for adjudication are given 
below: 
 
 
The Legal Cell also provided inputs to all judgements passed by the Authority/ Registrar 
during the Reporting Period.  During this period, the landmark judgement was passed by Ld. 
Chairperson by order dated 3rd December, 2021 in Revocation of Registered Potato Variety FL-
2027 [Kaivtha Kuruganti – Vs- PepsiCo India Holdings Pvt. Ltd., 2022 (89) PTC 280] which was 
reviewed and reported widely both nationally and internationally.  
 
Legal Cell also successfully organised a webinar on 14th January, 2022, in collobaration 
with Law Centre-II, Entrepreneurial, Faculty of Law, University of Delhi on “Legal Aspects 
involved in PPVFR Act, 2001” 
 
The following Gazette Notifications were published in the year 2021-22: 
 Central Administrative Tribunal  High Courts  Supreme Court  
4 22 7 
Annual Report 2021 -22 256 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Gazette Notification S.O. 3418(E)  dated August 23, 2021  regarding notification of 4 crop 
species (not being extant varieties and farmers' varieties) Jackfruit, Greater Yam, Yam 
Bean and Seabuckthrornfor the purpose of registration of varieties. 
 Gazette Notification G.S.R. 803(E)  dated November 16, 2021  regarding Amendment in 
Rule 19 - Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (Second Amendment) Rules, 
2021. 
 Gazette Notification S.O. 1197(E)  dated March 16, 2022  regarding notification of 8 crop 
species (not being extant varieties and farmers' varieties) Ajwain, Anise, Celery, Cumin, 
Dill, Fennel and Nigella for the purpose of registration of varieties. 
8.3 RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) 
During the reporting period, under the RTI Act, 2005, Sh. U K Dubey and Sh. Vipin Tyagi 
continuous as central public information officer and first Appellate Authority respectively at 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Authority (PPVFRA) for furnishing information 
to the concerned applicants. The details of the designated officers are available on website of the 
Authority under the menu heading RTI. Compliance of provisions contained under section 25(2) 
of RTI Act, 2005 for submission of information to Chief Information Commissioner (CIC) are 
being done on a regular basis. During the reporting period, the Authority received 26 applications 
either directly from the applicant or transferred from other departments seeking information under 
RTI Act, 2005. The information sought was made available within the stipulated period. 
 
The status of the applications received by the Authority is uploaded on its website on regular basis. 
The quarterly status of the applications is available on the website of the Authority and Central 
Information Commissioner (CIC) with full details including receipt of fees too. 
 
8.4 GOVERNMENT e -MARKETPLACE (GEM)  
During the reporting year 2021-2022, the Authority purchased different items, worth Rs. 
15,86,441/- (Rupees Fifteen Lakh Eighty Six Thousand Four Hundred Forty One Only) through 
GeM after completing necessary formalities. The month-wise purchase with value and items are as 
under:-  
Table 8.2: Report of Procurement (GeM) during 2021-2022 (1st April, 2021 to 31st March, 
2022) 
 
S No. Particular  Month Amount (Rs.)  
1. Monitor-1, Window AC -1, Server Software -1, 
Sticky Notepad -30, Envelope -3000, HP 
Mouse-20, Pen Drive -15, Acer Computer -3, 
HP MFM -4, WD Hard Disk -1, Lexmark Toner -
16, Stapler Pin -100, Brown Tape -100, Stapler 
Pin Big-100, A4 Ream -200, Reynolds Pen -300, 
Cello Tape-100, Pilot Pen -50, Ball Pen -200, 
Uniball Pen -50, Glue Stick -100, HP Toner -18, 
Xerox Toner -1, Antivirus -50, HP Computer -1, 
Liquid Handwash -50, Flag-50, Slip-50, Hot Air April, 2021  Rs. 12,200/ - 
2. May, 2021   
3. June, 2021  Rs. 56,951/ - 
4. July, 2021  Rs. 15,532/ - 
5. August, 2021  Rs. 1,58,186/ - 
6. September, 2021  Rs. 52,617/ - 
7. October, 2021  Rs. 1,02,510/ - 
8. November, 2021  Rs. 37,910/ - 
9. December, 2021  Rs. 62,100/ - 
10. January, 2022  Rs. 31,585/- 
Annual Report 2021 -22 257 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 11. Oven-1, UPS-3, Web-Camera-4 and Speaker -4 February, 2022  Rs. 2,77,021/ - 
12. March, 2022  Rs. 14,304/ - 
Total Amount  Rs. 8,20,916/ - 
Service (Vehicle Hire)  Rs. 7,65,525/ - 
GRAND TOTAL AMOUNT  Rs. 15,86,441/ - 
 
8.5 INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND SUPPLY OF CERTIFIED COPY  
 
During the reporting period, the request for inspection of records and supply of certified copies of 
the 11 varieties were received under section 84 of PPVFR Act, 2001 and Rule 76 of PPVFR Rule, 
2003. The amount Rs. 2,29,517/- (Rupees Two Lakh Twenty Nine Thousand Five Hundred 
Seventeen Only) as fees for the above purpose were deposited by the concerned applicant. After 
receipt of fees, the certified copies were supplied to the concerned applicants. 
 
8.6 BRANCH OFFICES:  
 
PPVFR Authority has five branch offices located in different parts of the country headed by 
Deputy Registrar as detailed below:  
1. Sh. Phool Singh Malviya,  
Deputy Registrar  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Computer Centre Building, Near Damodar International Guest House, 
Birsa Agriculture University Campus, Kanke, Ranchi (JH)-834006  
 
2. Sh. Phool Singh Malviya (In-charge) 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority 
Govt. of India, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Assam Agricultural University, Near Administrative Building, Khanapara, Guwahati-781022 
 
3. Dr. Shiv Kumar Sharma,  
Deputy Registrar (on contract basis) 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
CSK HP Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Palampur, Dist. Kangra, Himachal Pradesh-176061 
  
4. Dr.  S. B. Chaudhary,  
Deputy Registrar (on contract basis) 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 258 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Centenary Building, College of Agriculture Campus,  
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra-411005  
5. Dr. T.H. Gowda, Deputy Registrar (on contract basis)  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority 
Department of Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare, 
UAHS Shivamogga, Abbalagere post, Shivamogga, Karnataka-577204  
 
 
8.7. PPVFRA ENTRUSTED WITH THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF “NARAKAS” OR TOLIC 
(TOWN OFFICIAL LANGUAGE IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE) 
 
Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India, entrusted the 
responsibility of Chairmanship of Town Official Language Implementation Committee (TOLIC) 
North Delhi to Protection of Plant Varieties & Farmers’ Rights Authority on September, 2018. In 
year annual meetings are held twice. There are 77 offices as members in the said committee. A 10 
member committee was formed to operate different provisions of official languages. 
 
8.7.1 Officials Language Implementation Committee of PPVFRA 
 
Authority has already an existing official language implementation committee for implementation 
of official language in the Authority. In the reporting year all four meetings were conducted and 
discussed on various issues of official language. 
 
8.7.2  Rajbhasha Fortnight  
  
Rajbhasa Fortnight was organized in the Authority from 14 September, 2021 to 28 September, 
2021. During the reporting period many competitions were organized for celebrating Hindi 
Fortnight in which many officials participated including contractual employee and paid cash prize 
to the winners. 
 
8.7.3 Use of official Language Hindi          
 
Official Language Hindi is used in Authority by officials. Officials of Authority have done noting 
and drafting in Hindi. Section 3(3) of the Official Language Act, 1963, all the official documents 
are issued in bilingual and the letters to different regions A, B and C are sending as per norms of 
Government. 
 
8.7.4 Hindi Pakhwada 
The PPVFR Authority celebrated Hindi Pakhwada from 14th to 28th September, 2021. During the 
period, the Authority has organized competition for the employees of the PPVFR Authority. A 
prize distribution function was organized on 29th December, 2021 at the Headquarter of PPVFRA, 
New Delhi. 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 259 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 8.8. OBSERVANCE OF VIGILANCE AWARENESS WEEK  
 
Though the Authority does not come under the jurisdiction of the Central Vigilance Act or Central 
Vigilance Commission Act (2003), in view of the establishment of the spirit of maintaining the 
Authority free of any corruption and misuse of official position, the Authority in solidarity with 
the same observed Vigilance Awareness Week administering the oath by its staff, employees and 
officers.  
The Authority observed the Vigilance Awareness Week where the staff of the Authority 
collectively participated in the prevention of corruption and the fight against corruption being 
vigilant as part of the Vigilance Awareness Week (26th October, 2021 to 1st November, 2021) with 
the theme “ स्वतंत्र भारत @ 75: सत्यनिष्ठा से आत्मनिभभरता  (Independent India @ 75: Self Reliance with 
Integrity)”.   
The observance of the Vigilance Awareness Week commenced with the taking of the 
Integrity Pledge.  
 
 
 
8.10 PARTICIPATION OF CHAIRPERSON IN VARIOUS MEETINGS AND 
DISCUSSIONS DURING 2021-22  
MONTH  DESCRIPTION  
 
APRIL, 2021  
08th April,2021  Chairperson attended an International webinar on Exchange on PVP Post 
Control Measures through VC mode.  
16th April,2021  Chairperson attended a meeting with the Secretary (AC& FW) For discussing 
the issues relating to PPVFRA at Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.  
JUNE, 2021  
01st June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting between APEDA and PPVFRA through VC 

Annual Report 2021 -22 260 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 mode.  
04th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting NAAS Foundation Day Lecture 2021 
Programme through VC mode.  
9th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a Review meeting with DUS Centers - Cereals and 
Pulses through VC mode.  
10th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a Review meeting with DUS Centers - Vegetables 
Crops through VC mode.  
11th June 2021  Chairperson attended a Review meeting with DUS Centers - Horticulture 
Crops through VC mode.  
14th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting for development of a mechanism for 
involvement  of private sector in research and development (R&D) activities 
and promoting new varieties of oil seeds and pulses through through VC 
mode. 
17th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting of Annual Dus Review meeting through VC 
mode. 
23rd June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting of Annual Dus Review meeting through VC 
mode. 
24th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting forDeveloping a Mechanism for involvement 
of private sector in Research and Development (R&D) activities and 
promoting new varieties of  Oil seeds and Pulses through VC mode.  
25th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting of Putting farmers’ and indigenous peoples´ 
access to crop diversity first, in seed policy and practice for seed security  
through VC mode  
28th June, 2021  Chairperson attended a webinar  meeting with Chairperson of Various Sub -
Committee  to discuss for arrangement of 9th GB of Treaty in India through 
VC mode.  
JULY, 2021  
05th July, 2021  Chairperson attended a PPVFRA Technical Advisory Committee Meeting 
through VC mode  
05th July, 2021  Chairperson attended a Review meeting of DUS Centres through VC mode  
16th July, 2021  Chairperson attended a Meeting with Secretary Agriculture regarding Filling 
up of the post of Registrar General, PPVFR Authority and other pending 
issues at krishi bhawan, New Delhi  
21st July, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting for Management   implementation of Plant 
Genetic Resources through VC mode.  
22nd July, 2021  Chairperson organized a meeting for Laying of Foundation Stone of the 
upcoming buildin g Plant at Authority Bhawan PPVFRA  
23rd July, 2021  Chairperson discussed on the adoption of revised emoluments for technical 
manpower (JRF/SRF/YPs as per DST/ICAR guidelines) and their recruitment 
for those working under DUS projects at DUS centres at PP VFRA 
28th July, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting on Putting farmers’ and indigenous peoples´ 
access to crop diversity first, in seed policy and pract through VC mode  
AUGUST, 2021  
02nd August, 
2021 Chairperson Lead a lecture at  Pusa Krishi Incubation Program, ICAR -IARI, 
New Delhi, MoA&FW, GoI through VC.  
9th August, 2021  Chairperson attended 28th Annual General Body Meeting of the National 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences through VC.  
12th August, 2021  Chairperson attended India's negotiation with EU on FTA - meeting to discuss 
Annual Report 2021 -22 261 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 issues pertaining to Department of Agriculture through VC .  
13th August, 2021  
 Chairperson attended a meeting  TNAU with DM’s and DAO’s through VC.  
17th August, 2021  Chairperson attended a National IP awards ceremony 2020 through VC.  
19th August, 2021  Chairperson attended a meeting for Installation of Gene -Bank Seed Store 
System at the new Plant Authority Bhawan at krishi bhawan, New Delhi.  
26th August, 2021  Chairperson attended a National Workshop on  Bridging the Yield Gaps to 
Enhance Food grain Production: A Way Forward through VC.  
SEPTEMBER, 2021  
2nd September, 
2021 Chairperson attended Online Project Steering Committee (PSC) Meeting 
between India and Germany under Indo -German Bilateral Cooperation on 
Seed Sector Development through VC.  
5th September, 
2021 Chairperson lead a lecture on Teachers’ Day on the topic “ M anaging 
Innovations” through VC.  
8th September 
2021 Chairperson attended a meeting on Horticulture Development for Farmer’s 
Prosperity’ through VC.  
15th September, 
2021 Chairperson attended a meeting of Indo -German Cooperation on Seed Sector 
Development through VC.  
25th September, 
2021 Chairperson attended a VS Mathur Memorial Award Function organize by 
Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, Karnal through VC  
27th September, 
2021 Chairperson attended a Meeting to finalize and select the awardees  by 
screening nominations Dr.R.B.Singh Sir Chairman of the selection 
committee of Plant Genome Saviour Farmers Community Awards at 
Conference Hall of ICAR, NASC Complex  
OCTOBER, 2021  
4th October, 2021  Chairperson attended  a Meeting of Conveners of Sectional Committee 
through VC  
7th  October, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended meeting of process of evaluation start during (9 -10 
October, 2021) NAAS Sectional Committee Provide valuable input in 
selecting suitab le candidates for Academy’s Fellowship/Associateship and 
Young Scientist Awards  through VC  
9-10 October, 
2021 Chairperson attended a NAAS Sectional Committee meeting through VC.  
11th October, 
2021 Chairperson attended a meeting for Opening the financial  bid of the tender 
for Managing 9th Session of Governing Body of International Treaty on 
Plant Genetic Resource for Food and Agriculture at IARI, New Delhi.  
20th  October, 
2021 Chairperson lead a lecture in a Collaborative Training on “Agricultural 
Legislation for Agricultural Extension Professionals” Banaras Hindu 
University in collaboration with MANAGE, Hyderabad through VC.  
NOVEMBER, 2021  
18th November, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended a 2nd International Symposium on Agrobiodiversity 
through VC.  
22nd November, 
2021 
 Expert Consultation on “Accelerating Export of Seed Spices: Challenges and 
Opportunities” VC  
DECEMBER, 2021  
1st December, 
2021 Chairperson attended a meeting of Protection of plant variety, the key to 
improved agricultural commerce & growth through VC.  
Annual Report 2021 -22 262 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 7th December, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended a meeting of Nomination to the First Special Session 
Governing Body of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for 
Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) through VC.  
14th December, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended a meeting of International Vegetable Conference, 
ICVEG-21 at VC/ Auditorium Hall A, NASC Complex, New Delhi.  
15th December, 
2021 Chairperson discussed different matters/issues for organising the Bharat ki 
Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav at PPVFRA 
15th December, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended an International Vegetable Conference, ICVEG -21and 
lecture on TECHNICAL SESSION -VIII (Theme -6) EDUCATION AND IPR 
ISSUES INCLUDING PPVFR VC at Auditorium Hall A, NASC Complex, 
New Delhi  
16th December, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended an International Webinar“Exchange on Biochemical 
and Molecular Techniques (BMT) Guidelines and Implementation of BMT in 
DUS”under Indo -German Cooperation on Seed Sector Development through 
VC 
17th December, 
2021 
 Chairperson attended  a meeting for Exchange on Biochemical and Molecular 
Techniques (BMT) Guidelines and Implementation of BMT in DUS”under 
Indo-German Cooperation on Seed Sector Development through VC  
21st December, 
2021 Chairperson attended a lectures by ISGPB award winner s through VC  
23rd December, 
2021 Chairperson attended a Second meeting of Executive Committee under the 
co-chairmanship of Secretary (A&FW) and Secretary DARE & DG, ICAR at 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi  
29th December, 
2021 Chairperson conducted meeting for ह ंदी पख वाड़ा की प्रनतयोनिता  के नवजेता को 
प्रमाण पत्र देिे के सम्बन्ध में at PPVFRA  
30th December, 
2021 Chairperson attended a meeting Bharat ki Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav at 
PPVFRA 
JANUARY, 2022  
1st January, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting  of Sitting of the Joint Committee on the 
Biological Diversity (Amendment)Bill, 2021 at parliament house  
3rd January, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting of Second meeting of Executive Committee 
under the co -chairmanship of Secretary (A&FW) and Secretary DAR E & 
DG, ICAR at Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi  
10th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a webinar during Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and 
Interaction with PGS Rewarded Farmers through VC  
10th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of Stakeholders Consultation on Genetically 
Modified (GM) Food and Feed Import and Detection of Unauthorised GM 
Food Events Participate as a Panellist through VC  
11th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a webinar during Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and 
Interaction with PGS Rewarded Farmers  thorugh VC  
11th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a Webinar on Microbial Biotechnology for Novel Food 
and Food Ingredients through VC  
12th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a  webinar during Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and 
Interaction with PGS Rewarded Fa rmers through VC  
13th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a Webinar on Legal Aspects involved in PPVFRA 
ACT, 2001 through VC  
14th January, Chairperson attended a Webinar on Legal Aspects involved in PPVFRA 
Annual Report 2021 -22 263 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 2022 ACT, 2001 organized by PPVFRA in collaborati on with Delhi University 
through VC  
18th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of 1st International Symposium “Cereals for 
Food Security and Climate Resilience” through VC  
18th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting t o discuss for organizing  9th Session of the 
Governing body of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for 
Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) in India through VC  
21st January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of 38th EVRC Meeting through VC  
 21st January, 
2022 Sitting of the Joint Committee on the Biological Diversity (Amendment)Bill, 
2021 at Parliament House, New Delhi  
19-22nd January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of Harnessing the potential of Finger millet 
for achieving food and nutritional security :  challenges and prospects (ICMF -
2022) at V.C. Farm, Mandya, Karnataka/VC  
 
28th January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting  to discuss on fixing and preponing and filing 
of additional documents in FSII Matter - WP (C) No.11738/2019 - FSII -Vs- 
UOI & Ors., at PPVFRA  
28-31st January, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of “Bio-con” Bio-sciences Congress 2022 at 
Hindustan College of Science & Technology, Farah, Agra  
31st January, 
2022 Chairperson lead a lecture a s Speaker under NIDHI -TBI, DST Govt. of  India 
being organized by PUSA TAKSAY Society, ZTM&BPD Unit, ICAR -IARI  
through VC  
FEBRUARY, 2022  
3rd & 4th 
February, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for Review of technical programme of DUS 
projects funded by PPVFRA from FY -2017-18 to 2021 -22 through VC  
9th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting t o Chair the Annual Day Function of Indian 
Institute of Maize Research, Ludhiana through VC  
10th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of 52nd Lal Bahadur Shastri Memorial 
Lecture throu gh VC 
11th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute 60th Convocation through VC  
17th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting of Indo German Seed Sector Development 
Project through VC  
17th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a meeting with German experts Discussion on 
finalizing upcoming DUS testing workshops under  “ Indo -German co -
operation on seed sector development”  through VC  
28th February, 
2022 Chairperson attended a webinar of Nati onal Science Day Lecture through VC  
MARCH, 2022  
2nd March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for Review of progress of the project “ 
Development of DUS Test guidelines of chilli Bell pepper and Paprika under 
protected condition” at HPKV, Palampur  
3rd March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for discuss and decide the contents relating 
to the materials & posters to be presented in  at Pusa Krishi Vigyan Mela 
PPVFRA 
9th March, 2022   Chairperson attended a meeting for Discussion on farmers’ rights a nd plant 
breeders rights with Telangana breeders VC  
9th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for Innovation and Commercialization 
Annual Report 2021 -22 264 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 among farmers’ at Pusa Krishi Vigyan Mela, IARI mela ground, PUSA, New 
Delhi.  
11th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for Innovation and Commercialization 
among farmers’ at  Pusa Krishi Vigyan Mela, IARI mela ground, PUSA,  
New Delhi  
15th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting of First National Project Steering Committee 
(NPSC) at Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi  
15th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting of Joint Committee on the Biological 
Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 - Oral evidence on the provisions of the 
Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 at Parliament House Annexe 
Extension (PHAE), at New Delhi.  
16th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting of amendment of Rule 74 of PPVFRA Rules, 
2003 at  Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi  
22nd March, 2022  
 Chairperson attended a meeting of Fifth EC Meeting of NGGF through VC  
28th March, 2022  Chairperson attended a meeting for Book Launch & Panel Discussion on 
Indian Agriculture Towards 2030 through VC  
30th March, 2022  Chairperson lead a Lecture on PPVFRA to Khadakpur Students through VC 
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 265 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 9:  Financial Statements of the Authority as on 31.03.2022  
 
 
The financial statements were prepared under the historical cost convention in accordance with 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), the applicable mandatory Accounting 
Standards (AS) issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and relevant 
presentational requirements for Central Autonomous Bodies as prescribed by the Controller 
General of Accounts (CGA). The Authority follows the accrual system of accounting in respect of 
all items of expenditure & income except where otherwise stated. A copy of Balance sheet as on 
31 March, 2022, Income & Expenditure Account and Receipt & Payment Account for the year 
ended 31 March, 2022 are given.  
In compliance with section 62(2) of PPVFRA Act, 2001, the accounts of the Authority 
were submitted to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG). The audited accounts 
along with audit report and management’s reply shall be sent to the Ministry separately for placing 
before both the houses of Parliament. The Authority has received Rs.5999.90 lakh as grants- in-aid 
from Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, during the year 2021– 22 and utilized 
Rs.6152.29 lakh after adjusting unspent balance of Rs.170.39 lakh (revalidation received from the 
Ministry) of previous year leaving a balance of Rs.18.00 lakh. 
 
BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31ST MARCH, 2022  
 
(Amount in Rupees)  
CORPUS / CAPITAL FUND AND LIABILITIES  As at March 31, 2022  As at March 31, 2021  
Corpus / Capital Fund  75,20,01,059  62,20,31,584  
Reserves and Surplus  - - 
Earmarked/Endowment Funds 10,57,87,071  46,02,39,372  
Secured Loans and Borrowings  - - 
Unsecured Loans and Borrowings  - - 
Deferred Credit Liabilities  - - 
Current Liabilities and Provisions  19,59,82,510  18,75,08,026  
     
TOTAL 1,05,37,70,640  1,26,97,78,982  
ASSETS    
 
Fixed Assets  
    Less: Accumulated Depreciation   
2,91,23,053  
2,39,48,835   
2,97,63,279  
2,39,04,314  
Net Fixed Assets  51,74,218  58,58,965  
     
Capital Work in Progress  7,65,350         7,55,600 
      
Investments -From Earmarked/Endowment Funds  - - 
Annual Report 2021 -22 266 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Investments -Others - - 
Current Assets, Loans Advances etc.  1,04,78,31,072  1,26,31,64,417  
Miscellaneous Expenditure  -  - 
(to the extent not written off or adjusted)     
TOTAL 1,05,37,70,640     1,26,97,78,982  
 
 
 
 
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH, 2022  
 
(Amount in Rupees) 
 
Income AUTHORITY FUND  GENE FUND  
For the year 
ended March 
31, 2022 For the year 
ended 
March 31, 
2021 For the year 
ended 
March 31, 
2022 For the 
year ended 
March 31, 
2021 
Income from Sales/ Services  - - - - 
Grants/Subsides  20,94,69,194  19,92,33,244   4,00,00,000  2,00,00,000  
Fees/Subscriptions  1,79,25,100  2,45,18,600  2,03,88,259  1,75,15,058  
Income from Investments  - - - - 
Income from Royalty, Publication etc.  - - - - 
Interest Earned  2,55,02,782  2,61,63,989  1,23,98,132  1,51,31,462  
Other Income  68,07,541  3,54,028  304  1390 
Increase/(Decrease) in stock of Finished 
goods and works in progress  - - - - 
Deferred Income 
(Depreciation/Amorization on fixed 
asset) 10,19,734  9,38,583  - - 
Prior period Adjustment A/c  67,01,730  27,00,175 - 4,15,79,083  
TOTAL (A)  26,74,26,081  25,39,08,619  7,27,86,695  9,42,26,993  
EXPENDITURE          
Establishment Expenses  5,50,55,443  5,08,22,130  - - 
Other Administrative Expenses etc.  1,83,23,300  1,97,00,365  1,09,57,282  25,67,897  
Expenditure on Grants, Subsidies etc.  12,21,71,369  15,06,45,208  - - 
Interest  15,05,619  13,73,656 - - 
Depreciation/ Amorization including 
Impairment Loss  10,19,734  9,38,583 - - 
Prior period Adjustment A/c   4,96,188 5,12,05,914  40,000  81,000 
TOTAL (B)  19,85,71,653  27,46,85,856  1,09,97,282  26,48,897  
Balance being excess of Income Over 
Expenditure (A -B) 6,88,54,428  (2,07,77,237)  6,17,89,413  9,15,78,096  
Transfer to special Reserve(Specify 
each) - - - - 
Annual Report 2021 -22 267 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Transfer to /from General Reserve  - - - - 
BALANCE BEING SURPLUS/ 
(DEFICIT) CARRIED TO 
CORPUS/CAPITAL FUND  6,88,54,428  (2,07,77,237)  6,17,89,413  9,15,78,096  
 
 
 
RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED  31st MARCH, 2022  
 
(Amount in Rupees) 
RECEIPTS   For the year 
ended March 
31, 2022   For the year 
ended March 
31, 2021  PAYMENTS   For the year 
ended March 
31, 2022  For the year 
ended March 
31, 2021 
1. Opening Balances     1. Expenses      
a) Imprest (Cash In 
hand)    a) 
Establishment 
Expenses  5,26,99,424  4,65,75,919  
Authority - 25,000  b) 
Administrative 
Expenses etc.,  1,96,41,212  1,95,16,093  
Ranchi Branch  1,268 1,337      
Guwahati Branch  3,991 33   2. Payments 
made against 
funds    
Shivmogga Branch  490  1,891  a)  Existing 
DUS Centres 
(Annexure -IV) 6,86,39,980  8,78,27,077  
     b) New DUS 
Centres 
(Annexure -
III) 2,27,33,907  2,78,52,040  
b) Bank Balances     c) Field Gene 
Bank 
(Annexure -V) 34,33,325  30,89,746  
i. In Current Account       
State Bank of India  7,72,527 3,30,63,163     
SBI (Gene Fund)  2,32,892 1,85,96,218  3. Expenditure 
on fixed Assets 
and Capital 
Work in 
Progress   
SBI Palampur 
Branch 33,363 1,08,189 Purchase of 
Fixed Assets 
(Authority)  2,45,340 6,98,709 
Annual Report 2021 -22 268 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
       
ii.In Deposit 
Accounts   4. Advance for 
Construction of 
Building given 
to Uttar 
Pradesh 
Rajkiya 
Nirman Nigam 
Ltd  
38,39,90,400   
37,75,26,815  
SBI-Gene Fund  16,26,79,459  18,16,18,576     
Canara Bank -
Gene Fund  8,35,82,522  -  5. Grant release 
to Training 
Centres 
(Annexure -VI) 80,000 2,40,000 
Canara Bank-
Authority 14,21,96,474  4,69,09,627     
SBI-Authority 19,22,12,760  20,51,28,410   6. Advance to 
outside Deptt.  25,69,880  45,72,960 
      
iii. In Saving 
Accounts    7. Contribution 
to Gene Fund                4,00,00,000  2,00,00,000  
Canara Bank  6,14,46,622  7,00,18,402     
SBI Guwahati 
Branch  1,37,548  1,28,471  8.Refund of 
Fees/ 
Subscriptions/
Other Income    
SBI Ranchi 
Branch 1,31,268  1,21,283  Refund of 
Application/
Registration 
Fees                     
2,59,200  10,000  
Canara Bank 
Shivamogga 
Branch 56,472  4,08,033   Refund of 
Annual 
Renewal 
Fees                   
-  7,96,520  
Bank of 
Maharashtra Pune 
Branch 1,26,843 1,29,921     
    9. Contribution 
to ITPGFRA  21,39,512  46,98,913 
Annual Report 2021 -22 269 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  2. Grants received 
from Government of 
India   59,99,90,000  61,15,59,000     
    10. Other Prior 
Period 
Adjustment A/c                     
5,18,670  36,000  
 3. Interest Received 
from Bank    3,04,89,421  3,31,82,825     
    11. Advance to 
Employee of 
PPVFRA  7,91,039 5,99,351 
 4.Refund of Grant 
from Training Centres  80,000 81,449    
    12. Statutory 
Liabilities Paid  2,76,16,080  2,82,88,175  
 5. Refund of Grant for 
Development of DUS 
Guidelines (New DUS 
Centre)  93,836  3,15,201    
    13. Other 
Remmittances  1,50,219 1,16,048 
  6. Refund of Advance 
from Employees  950 69,701    
   14. Closing 
Balances    
  7. Refund of Grant 
from Referral 
Laboratories  - 1,46,945 a) Imprest 
(Cash In hand)    
   Ranchi Branch   1,268 
8. Unclassified 
Receipts 2,05,54,247  21,37,258 Guwahati 
Branch   3,991 
   Shivmoga 
Branch   450 
9. Fees / 
Subscriptions/Other 
Income   Palampur 
Branch 841 - 
Application/ 
Registration Fees  44,64,800  67,04,500    
Advance for 
Application 
Fees/Registration Fees   -  b) Bank 
Balances    
PV Subscription  Fees 38,12,500  53,33,500 i. In Current 
Account   
Annual Report 2021 -22 270 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annual Fees (Including 
Share from sale of 
Seeds)- Gene  Fund   1,90,14,771  1,65,09,931  State Bank of 
India 5,94,560 7,72,527 
DUS Test Fees  74,58,000  88,74,000 SBI (Gene 
Fund) 2,03,93,594  2,32,892 
Other Income 
(including prior period)  2,76,039 - SBI Palampur 
Branch 33,771 33,363 
Annual Renewal Fees  26,60,000  35,34,000    
Sale of Old 
Newspapers, Scrap  1,600  1,600 ii. In Deposit 
Account   
Contribution from 
Authority Fund  4,00,00,000   2,00,00,000  SBI-Gene 
Fund 7,69,75,000  16,26,79,459  
   Canara 
Bank-Gene 
Fund 12,50,42,176  8,35,82,522  
 10. GPF Recurring 
Deposit  - 13,50,000 UBI-Gene 
Fund 10,12,46,700  - 
   Canara 
Bank-
Authority 21,36,12,151  14,21,96,474  
 11. CGEGIS Amount 
Received  1,320 360 UBI-
Authority 18,88,08,444  - 
    SBI- 
Authority  22,57,000  19,22,12,760  
12. Refund  17,11,142  -    
   iii. In Saving 
Account   
13. Sales of Assets  10,380 - Canara Bank  1,86,68,834  6,14,46,622  
   SBI 
Guwahati 
Branch 1,17,612 1,37,548 
   SBI Ranchi 
Branch 1,10,834 1,31,268 
   Canara Bank 
Shivamogga 
Branch 7,06,593 56,472 
Annual Report 2021 -22 271 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
    Bank of 
Maharashtra 
Pune Branch  1,19,963 1,26,843 
   Union Bank 
of India 37,202 - 
        
 TOTAL  1,37,42,33,464  1,26,60,58,824   TOTAL  1,37,42,33,464  1,26,60,58,824  
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 272 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Chapter 10: Citizen’s Charter   
 
10.1 VISION OF THE AUTHORITY: 
 
To ensure an effective system for protection of plant varieties, the rights of the farmers, plant 
breeders and to encourage the development of new varieties of plants. 
 
10.2 OBJECTIVES OF THE AUTHORITY : 
 
 To provide an effective system for protection of plant varieties and rights of farmers, plant 
breeders and researchers.  
 To protect plant breeders’ rights and to stimulate investment for Research & Development and 
evolution of new varieties.  
 To recognize the farmers in respect of their contributions made for conserving, improving and 
making available plant genetic resources for development of new plant varieties.  
 To facilitate the growth of seed industry to ensure production and availability of high quality 
seeds and planting material to the farmers.  
 
10.3 FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY: 
 
 Encourage the development of new varieties of plants and to protect the rights of the farmers 
and the plant breeders.  
 Establishment of National Gene bank for orthodox seeds and field gene banks for perennial 
crops  
 Registration of new and extant varieties of plants 
 Developing documentation of registered plant varieties 
 Documentation, indexing and cataloguing of farmers’ varieties 
 Compulsory cataloguing facility for all varieties of plants 
 Ensuring seeds of varieties registered under the Act are available to farmers and providing for 
compulsory license, if needs arise 
 Ensuring maintenance of National Register of plant varieties 
 Utilization of Gene Fund for supporting the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic 
resources and capacity building of the panchayats in carryings out such conservation and 
sustainable use and meeting the expenditure of the schemes relating to benefits sharing and 
compensations to the stakeholders Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights is a 
unique subject involving diverse activities, initiatives and stakeholders. The stakeholders of 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority are Central Government, State 
Governments, Union Territories, Research Organizations including State Agricultural 
Universities, Seed Industries, NGOs and above all the farmers including tribal farming 
communities.  
 
 
Annual Report 2021 -22 273 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 10.4 SERVICES OFFERED BY THE AUTHORITY: 
 
 Providing IPR protection to plant varieties bred by farmers, researchers/ plant breeders in the 
form of plant variety registration 
 Maintaining National Register of Plant varieties wherein details of plant varieties and the 
rights of respective breeders are documented 
 Providing compensation to the farmers in case a registered variety does not perform as per 
the claim made by the breeders 
 Facilitating benefit sharing to the communities/ farmers for the contribution/ sharing of plant 
genetic resources 
 Creating awareness and capacity building for the rights of plant breeders and farmers 
towards implementation of PPVFR Act, 2001 
 Developing plant varieties database for the stakeholders 
 Supporting and rewarding farmers and communities of farmers, particularly the tribal and 
rural communities, engaged in conservation, improvement and preservation of genetic 
resources 
 
10.5 GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL MECHANISM: 
 
Financial Advisor, PPVFRA, is designated as the 1st Appellate Authority for RTI matters from 
16.10.2020 and can be contacted at: 
 Sh. Vipin Tyagi,  
Financial Advisor 
 1st Appellate Authority  
 Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
S-2, A Block, NASC Complex, DPS Marg, 
New Delhi-110012.  
Ph: 011-25843632, Fax: 011-25840478 
E-mail: fa-ppvfra@nic.in; www.plantauthority.gov.in  
 
Deputy Registrar, PPVFRA, is designated as the Central Public Information Officer to address the 
RTI matters and can be contacted at: 
 
 Sh. Uma Kant Dubey,  
Deputy Registrar 
Central Public Information Officer  
 Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
S-2, A Block, NASC Complex, DPS Marg, 
New Delhi-110012. 
Ph: 011-25843853, Fax: 011-25840478 
E-mail: uk.dubey@gov.in; www.plantauthority.gov.in  
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 274 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  
Annexure I: Members of PPVFR Authority (As on 31st March, 2022)  
 
List of Authority Members 
S.No Name Designation  Address 
1 Dr. S.K. Malhotra  Agriculture Commissioner  Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. 
of India, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi – 110 
001 
2 Dr. A.K. Singh  Deputy Director General 
(Crop Science)  Division of Crop Science, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Govt. of India, Indian 
Council for Agricultural Science, Krishi 
Bhavan, New Delhi - 110 001 
3 Shri Ashwani Kumar  Joint Secretary (Seeds)  Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. 
of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 
001 
4. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana  Joint Secretary & Legal 
Advisor Room No. 406B (A), 4th Floor, A Wing, 
Department of Legal Affairs, Shastri 
Bhawan, New Delhi -110001.  
5 Dr. S.K. Malhotra  Horticultural Commissioner  Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Govt. of India, Room no 
238, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 
001 
6 Dr. Kuldeep Singh  Director National Bureau of Plant Genetic 
Resources, Pusa, DPS Marg, New Delhi -
110 012 
7 - Adviser/Scientist ‘G’  Department of Biotechnology, Ministry 
of Science & Technology, Govt. of India, 
Room No. 809, 8th Floor, Block - 2, CGO 
Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi - 
110003 
8 - Adviser  Ministry of Environment & Forests & 
Climate Change, Room No.V -235, Indira 
Paryavaran Bhawan, New Delhi - 110003 
9 Shri Tummala 
Anjaneyulu  Member Sugar Cane Grower’s Association of 
Andhra Pradesh Village Remalle, 
Bapulapadu Mandal, Distt. Krishna, 
Andhra Pradesh – 521110 
10 Smt. Jui Pethe  Vanvasi Kalyan Ashram, 1, Shripad, 
Vakratunda Row, House, Opp. Rama 
Raman Apartment, Vrindavan Nagar, 
Kamatwade, Nashik - 422010. 
11 Shri V. Venkateswarlu  Director M/s Vasanth Agri Biotech Pvt Ltd. 1 -3-
158/401, BSN Reddy Complex, 
Rajendranagar, Mahabubnagar,  
Telangana – 509001 
Annual Report 2021 -22 275 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 12 Dr. Pramod Kumar 
Mishra, Director of Research 
Services, Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa 
Vidyalaya,  B-6 Krishi Nagar, Aadhartal, 
Jabalpur,  Madhya Pradesh, Pin - 482004. 
13 Dr. Sudha Tiwari  National President  SHAKTI (NGO for empowerment of 
Women), 50 -51, Gurukripa Society, Naik 
Nagar, Near. Manewada Sq. Nagpur -
440027 
14 - Additional Chief Secretary 
(Agriculture) or/Principal 
Secretary (Agriculture)  Government of Gujarat  
15 - Additional Chief Secretary 
(Agriculture) or/Principal 
Secretary (Agriculture)  Government of Himachal Pradesh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 276 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure II: Details of Human Resources of PPVFR Authority as on 31st 
March, 2022  
 
  S. No Name   Designation  Pay Level as per 7th CPC 
1.  Dr. K. V. Prabhu  Chairperson  Level 17 ( Rs. 225000/ -) 
2.  Vacant ( w.e.f. 23.12.2019)  Registrar -General Level 15 
3.  Dr. Ravi Prakash  
(proceeded on deputation 
w.e.f 16.10.2020)  Registrar  Level 13 (Rs.123100 -215900) 
4.  Dr. T. K. Nagarathna  Registrar 
5.  Vacant ( w.e.f. 05.12.2018)  Registrar  
6.  Sh. Vipin Tyagi  Financial Advisor  
7.  Sh. D. R. Choudhury  Joint Registrar  Level 12 ( Rs.78800 -209200) 
8.  Vacant (11.11.2017)  Joint Registrar  
9.  Sh. Raj Ganesh  Legal Advisor  Level 11 ( Rs.67700 -208700) 
10.  Sh. U.K. Dubey  Deputy Registrar  
11.  Sh. R. S. Sengar  Deputy Registrar 
12.  Sh. Arun Kumar  Legal Advisor  
13.  Dr. A. K. Singh  PVE Level 7 ( Rs. 44900 -142400) 
14.  Dr. D. S. Plania  Technical Assistant  Level 6 (Rs. 35400 -112400) 
15.  Sh. Arvind Kumar Rai  Computer Assistant  
16.  Sh.  Sanjay Kr. Gupta  Computer Assistant  
17.  Smt. Shipra Mathur  Computer Assistant  
18.  Sh. Nitesh Kumar Verma  Computer Assistant  
19.  Sh. Shyam Narayan Prasad  Computer Assistant  
Annual Report 2021 -22 277 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure III: Statement Showing Funds Released to New DUS 
Centres/Projects During 2021 -22 
Sr. No. Name of the New DUS Centre  Crop Release During 
2021-22 ( in 
Rupees) 
1 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Papaya and Custard Apple  3,05,145  
2 Dr. Y.S.Parmar University of Horticulture 
& Forestry, Solan  Carnation  5,25,000 
3 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  China Astar  4,17,166 
4 TNAU,Coimbatore  Papaya and Custard Apple  2,50,839  
5 UHS, Bagalkot  Moringa Oleifera Lam  4,28,153  
6 IFGTB, Coimbatore  Tectona Grandis  5,61,622  
7 CIAH, ICAR -Unit, Bikaner  Chironji and Tamarind  8,90,696  
8 CISH, ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Bael 2,91,385  
9 CIAH, ICAR -Unit, Bikaner  Bael 3,20912  
10 NRC, Puttur, ICAR -Unit, Cashew  Cashew 5,59,205 
11 TNAU,Coimbatore  Neem, Karanj & Jatrapha  3,80,668 
12 Dr. Y. S. Parmar University of Horticulture 
&  Forestry, Solan  Willow (Salix Species)  3,97,422 
13 IIHR, ICAR-Unit, Bangalore  Marigold 9,95,429 
14 UAS Dharwad  Cowpea 7,00,000 
15 CPCRI, Karnataka  Arecanut 14,50,395 
16 CIAH, ICAR -Unit, Bikaner  Datepalm  3,60,684 
17 CIAH (Central Institute for Arid 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Bikaner  Jamun 1,65,316 
18 Dr. Y. S. Parmar University of Horticulture 
&  Forestry, Solan  Seabuckthorn  5,79,574 
19 CISH, (Central Institute for Subtropical 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Anola 9,64,222 
Annual Report 2021 -22 278 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 20 CISH, (Central Institute for Subtropical 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Jamun 1,32,645 
21 Dr B S Konkan Krishi Viswadidyalaya, 
Dapoli Nutmeg 3,57,774 
22 UAS, GKVK, Bangalore  Jackfruit 8,38,020 
23 SKAUST - K, Srinagar   Saffron  9,00,000 
24 UAHS, Shivamogga   Anthurium  7,66,437 
25 IIHR, Bangalore   Dolichos Bean  3,83,125 
26 BCKV, Kalyani   Dahlia & Hibiscus  7,14,902 
27 ACHF, NAU, Navsari, Gujarat    Eucalyptus & Urophylla  6,88,713 
28 IIOR, Hyderabad   Niger  2,02,541 
29 TNAU, Coimbatore   Black Gram  2,17,418 
30 IARI, New Delhi   Sponge Gourd  1,97,862 
31 IIVR, Varanasi   Sponge Gourd  
90,000 
32 CIMAP, LUCKNOW  Ashwagandha  12,90,637 
33 Comptroller,SKUAST -K,Srinagar   Pran  9,00,000 
34 Comptroller,SKUAST -K,Srinagar   Rajmash & valley  9,00,000 
35 Comptroller,SKUAST -K,Srinagar   Turnip  9,00,000 
36 IIHR, BANGALORE   Carrot  3,00,000 
37 IIHR, BANGALORE   Curry  Leaves  9,00,000 
38 
NRC on Litchi,Muzaffarpur   Litchi & Guava  6,10,000 
39 UAS,GKVK, BANGALORE   Chilli, Bell Peprika  9,00,000 
           
TOTAL 22,733,907  
Annual Report 2021 -22 279 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure IV: Statement Showing Funds Released to  Existing DUS 
Centres/Projects during 2021 -22 
 
Sr. 
No. Name of DUS Centre  Crop Release During 
2021-22 ( in 
Rupees) 
1 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Tuberrose & Carnation  5,91,642 
2 CTCRI (Central Tuber Crops Research 
Institute), Thiruvananthapuram  Sweet Potato and Cassava  6,66,605 
3 DFR, (Directorate of Floricultural Research), 
IARI Campus, New Delhi  Gladiolus 4,68,606 
4 BCKV, (Bidhan Chandra Krishi 
Visavidyalaya), Kalyani  Pointed Gourd  6,90,604 
5 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Jasmine 3,93,063 
6 CITH, (Central Institute for Tropical 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Srinagar  Peach, Plum, Apple, Almond, 
Pear, Apricot & walnut  15,78,134  
7 CISH (Central Ins for Subtopical 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Mango 10,86,076  
8 RARI, Durgapur, Jaipur  Barley 8,86,796 
9 DFR (Dir. Of Floriculture) IARI  Tuberose 4,66,334 
10 IARI, Divivision of Floriculture, New Delhi  Bouganvilla  5,83,014 
11 MPKV, (Mathma Phule Krishi 
Viswavidyalaya), Rahuri (Pune Station)  China astar  5,74,392 
12 JNKVV, Jabalpur  Field Pea, Linseed & Lentil 7,24,684 
13 BCKV, (Bidhan Chandra Krishi 
Visavidyalaya), Kalyani  Betel Vine  2,04,760 
14 IGKV, Raipur  Rice 1,92,650 
15 CIMAP, (Central Institute for Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants), Lucknow  Medicinal Plants  4,23,442 
16 CIAH (Central Institute for Arid 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Bikaner  Ber 5,47,471 
17 IARI, Division of Vegetable Science, New Bottle gourd, Bitter Gourd, 5,70,259 
Annual Report 2021 -22 280 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Delhi Pumpkin & Cucumber  
18 IARI, Regional Station, Katrain  Cabbage and Cauiflower  5,36,407 
19 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Mango 5,68,779 
20 NRC, ICAR -Unit, Trichy  Banana 4,23,716 
21 TRA, Tocklai  Tea 2,83,652 
22 CARI, ICAR -Unit, Port Blair  Noni 4,36,305 
23 TNAU, Coimbatore  Small Millet  10,27,044  
24 NBPGR, ICAR -Unit, New Delhi  Grain Amaranth  12,68,040  
25 DGR, (Directorate of Groundnut Research), 
ICAR-Unit,Junagarh  Groundnut  2,49,477 
26 JNKVV, Jabalpur  Sesame and Niger  4,62,752 
27 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Watermelon and Muskmelon  3,41,865 
28 CSRTI, (Central Sericultural Research and 
Training Institute), Mysore Mulberry 5,11,164 
29 Dr. Y. S. Parmar University of Horticulture 
&  Forestry, Solan  Poplar Germplasm  4,65,605 
30 IFGTB (Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree 
Breeding), Coimbatore  Eucalyptus and Casuarina  3,50,431 
31 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Amaranth, Spinach & Ridge 
Gourd 10,12,092  
32 NRCSS, (National Research Centre for Seed 
Spices), ICAR -Unit, Ajmer  Seed Spices  4,73,974 
33 AAU, (Assam Agriculture University), Jorhat  Rice 6,13,010 
34 Division of Floriculture, IARI, ICAR -Unit, 
New Delhi  Marigold 3,55,803 
35 VPKAS (Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi 
Anusandhan Shala), ICAR -Unit, Almora  Rajma, Soybean & Maize  12,21,106  
36 DOGR (Directorate of Onion and Garlic 
Research), ICAR -Unit, Rajgurunagar  Onion and Garlic  3,32,729 
37 NRCP, ICAR -Unit, Sholapur Pomegranate  7,76,628 
Annual Report 2021 -22 281 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 38 Division of Vegetable Science, IARI, ICAR -
Unit, New Delhi  Onion and Garlic  3,26,557 
39 IISR (Indian Institute of Sugarcane 
Research), ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Sugarcane  2,69,510 
40 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Bangalore  Betel Vine  4,36,743 
41 CSAUA&T (Chandra Sekhar Azad 
University of Agriculture and Technology),  
Kanpur Mustard & Wheat  3,64,542 
42 IISR, (Indian Institute of Spices Research), 
ICAR-Unit, Calicut  Spices 6,03,968 
43 DSR (Directorate of Soybean Research), 
ICAR-Unit, Indore Soybean 4,59,385 
44 IIPR, (Indian Ins of Pulses Research), ICAR -
Unit, Kanpur  Mungbean, Urdbean, Lentil, 
Rajma & Pea  10,08,406  
45 NRC, (National Research Centre of Grapes), 
ICAR-Unit, Pune Maharastra  Grapes 10,57,147  
46 IARI, ICAR -Unit, Regional Station, Karnal  Rice 7,03,150 
47 Sugarcane Breeding Institute, ICAR -Unit, 
Coimbatore  Sugarcane  11,74,453  
48 IGKV, Raipur  Grow out Test (Rice)  5,73,824 
49 IIWBR, ICAR -Unit, Karnal  Barley & Wheat  16,16,070  
50 RAU, Bikaner -Mandore AICPMIP, Jodhpur  Pearl Millet 10,15,175  
51 PAU, (Punjab Agriculture University), 
Ludhiana  Oat, Cowpea & Guinea Grass & 
Cotton 7,33,725 
52 Central Tuber Crops Research 
Institute,ICAR -Unit,Trivandrum  Elephant Footyam, Taro, Yam 
Bean & Greater Yam  6,36,313 
53 CRRI, (Central Rice Research Institute), 
ICAR-Unit, Cuttack  Rice 8,55,401 
54 PDKV, (Panjab Rao Deshmukh Krishi 
Viswavidyalaya), Akola  Pigeon Pea, Chickpea, Red 
Gram & Safflower  11,28,315  
55 Division of Vegetable Science, IARI, New 
Delhi Amaranth, Palak, Ridge Gourd  5,88,250 
Annual Report 2021 -22 282 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 56 DMAPR (Dir. Medicinal & Aromatic Plant 
Research), Anand  Medicinal & Aromatic Plants  5,59,741 
57 CCSHAU (Choudhary Charan Singh Hisar 
Agriculture University), Hisar  Cotton & Chickpea  2,01,370 
58 IARI, ICAR -Unit, Regional Station, Indore  Wheat 5,77,574 
59 CPRI (Central Potato Research Institute), 
ICAR-Unit, Shimla  Potato 13,33,918  
60 NEH, ICAR -Unit, Region Station, Barapani, 
Manipur Rice 12,81,040  
61 Division of Vegetable Science, IARI, New 
Delhi Cabbage and Cauliflower  8,38,392 
62 PJTSAU, (Prof. Jayashankar Telengana State 
Agricultural University), Hyderabad  Maize 12,52,036  
63 TNAU (Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University), Coimbatore  Rice, Sunflower & Groundnut  1,15,116 
64 CTCRI (Central Tuber Crops Research 
Institute), ICAR -Unit, Regional Station, 
Bhubaneshwar  Sweet Potato and Cassava  4,11,325 
65 IIMR, ICAR -Unit, Hyderabad  Sorghum 6,28,094 
66 CRIJAFR, (Central Research Institute for 
Jute and Allied Fibres Research), 
Barrackpore & CSRS, Budbud  Jute 15,56,887  
67 MPKV, Rahuri  Cotton  5,11,913 
68 IIOR, ICAR -Unit, Hyderabad  Sunflower, Castor & Safflower  8,40,916 
69 CPCRI, ICAR -Unit, Kerala  Coconut 1,86,733 
70 UAS, GKVK, Banglore  Small Millet  11,95,593  
71 CISH, (Central Ins For Subtropical 
Horticulture), ICAR -Unit, Lucknow  Guava & Litchi 11,82,807  
72 IIPR, (Indian Ins of Pulses Research), ICAR -
Unit, Kanpur  Chickpea & Pigeon pea  14,61,732  
73 MPKV, Rahuri  Sorghum, Pearl Millet & 
Chickpea 5,84,042 
74 IIHR, ICAR -Unit, Hassarghatta, Bangalore  Vegetables  29,21,589  
Annual Report 2021 -22 283 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 75 UAS (University of Agriculture Sciences), 
Dharwad Cotton, Soybean, Groundnut, 
Durum Wheat and Sesame  13,49,817  
76 IIHR, (Indian Ins for Horticultural Research), 
ICAR-Unit, Bangalore  Rose & Chrysanthemum  9,90,929 
77 IIRR, Hyderabad, ICAR -Unit, Hyderabad  Rice 13,46,021  
78 IIMR, ICAR -Unit, New Delhi  Maize 13,74,383  
79 CICR, ICAR -Unit, (Central Institute For 
Cotton Research), Nagpur  Cotton 11,21,643  
80 IIVR, (Indian Institute of Vegetable 
Research), ICAR -Unit, Varanasi  Okra, Brinjal, Tomato, Cabbage 
& Cauliflower etc.  18,98,581  
81 NRCC, ICAR -Unit, Nagpur  Citrus, Acid Lime Sweet 
Orange & Mandarin  1,09,988 
82 IIHR, Bangalore  Chrysanthamum  3,85,338 
83 IARI, New Delhi  Chrysanthamum  2,32,529 
84 IIHR, Bangalore   Crossandra  2,08,048 
85 Dr. Y S R Horticulture University, Guntur, 
Andhra Pradesh   Chilli & Paprika  5,53,484 
86 UHS, Bagalkot   Chilli, Paprika & Bell Pepper  5,00,000 
87 SDAU,SK Nagar, Gujurat   Grain Amaranth  6,45,000 
88 PDKV, AKOLA COLLABRATING 
CENTER  Mung Bean  8,00,000 
89 CSKHPKV, Palampur   Buckwheat  6,45,000 
90 CSAUA&T, Kanpur   Linseed  7,00,000 
91 CICR, Coimbatore   Cotton  11,64,696  
92 CIAH,Bikaner   Watermelon and Muskmelon  10,63,660  
Total 6,86,39,980  
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 284 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure V: Statement Showing Funds Released to Field Gene Banks 
during 2021-22 
 
S. No. Name of Centres  Release During 2021 -22 (in 
Rupees) 
1 Dr. Balasaheb Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dapoli  8,49,082 
2 NBPGR, New Delhi  15,88,362 
3 YSPUH, Solan (Temperate Fruits) (FGB)  9,95,881 
TOTAL 34,33,325  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 285 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure VI: Statement Showing Funds Released to the 
Organisation/Centre for Training & Awareness during 
2021-22 
 
S. No. Name of Beneficiary  Release During 2021 -2022  
(in Rupees)  
1 Assam Agriculture University, Jorhat (AAU)  80,000 
TOTAL 80,000 
 
 
 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 286 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure VII: Crops Under Registration  
 
Sr. No. Crop Botanical name  
1. Rice Oryza sativa L. 
2. Bread wheat  Triticum aestivum L 
3. Maize Zea mays L. 
4. Sorghum Sorghum bicolor  ( L.) Moench 
5. Pearl millet  Pennisetum  glaucum (L.) R.Br.  
6. Chickpea Cicer arietinum  L. 
7. Mungbean  Vigna radiata (L.) Wilczek 
8. Urdbean Vigna mungo (L.) Hepper 
9. Fieldpea Pisum sativum L. 
10. kidney bean  Phaseolus  vulgaris L. 
13 Indian mustard  Brassica juncea L. Czern & Coss 
14 Karan rai Bracissa carinata A Braun 
15 Rapeseed(toria)  Brassica rapa L. 
16 Gobhi sarson Brassica napus L. 
17 Groundnut  Arachis hypogaea  L. 
18 Soybean Glycine max (L.) Merrill  
19 Sunflower  Helianthus  annuus L. 
20 Safflower  Carthamus  tinctorius  L. 
21 Castor Ricinus communis  L. 
22 Sesame Sesamum  indicum L. 
23 Linseed Linum usitatissimum  L. 
24 Diploid cotton  Gossypium  arboreum  L. 
25 Diploid cotton  Gossypium  herbaceum  L. 
26 Tetraploid  cotton Gossypium  hirsutum L. 
27 Tetraploid  cotton Gossypium  barbadense  L. 
28 Jute Corchorus  olitorius L. 
29 Jute Corchorus  capsularis  L. 
30 Sugarcane  Saccharum  L. 
31 Black pepper  Piper nigrum L. 
32 Small cardamom  Elettaria cardamomom  Maton 
33 Turmeric Curumma  longa L. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 287 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 34 Ginger Zingiber officinale  Rosc. 
35 Tomato Lycopersion  lycopersicum  (L.) Karsten ex. Farw. 
36 Brinjal Solanum melongena  L. 
37 Okra Abelmoschus  esculentus  (L.) Moench. 
38 Cauliflower  Brassica oleracea L.var. botrytis 
39 Cabbage Brassica oleracea L. var capitata 
40 Potato Solanum tuberosum  L. 
41 Onion Allium cepa L. 
42 Garlic Allium sativum L. 
43 Rose Rosa spp.(other than  R.damascena)  
44 Chrysanthemum  Chrysanthemum  spp. 
45 Mango Mangifera  indica L. 
46 Duram wheat Triticum durum Desf. 
47 Dicoccum  wheat Triticum dicoccum  L. 
48 Other Triticum species  
49 Isabgol Plantago  ovata Forsk 
50 Menthol mint  Mentha arvensis L. 
51 Damask Rose  Rosa damascena  Mill 
52 Periwinkle  Catharanthus  roseus L. 
53 Brahmi Bacopa monnieri L.Pennell 
54 Coconut Cocos nucifera L. 
55 Orchids Vanda 
56 Orchids Dandrobium  
57 Orchids Cymbidium  
58 Pomegranate  Punica granatum  L 
59 Orchid Cattleya Lindl. 
60 Orchid Phalaenopsis  Blume 
61 Eucalyptus  Eucalyptus  camaldulensis  Dehnh. 
62 Eucalyptus  Eucalyptus  tereticornis  Sm. 
63 Casurina Casuarina  equisetifolia  L 
64 Casurina Casuarina  junghuhniana  Miq. 
65 Bitter Gourd  Momordica  charantia  L. 
66 Bottle Gourd  Lagenaria  siceraria (Mol.) Standl. 
67 Cucumber  Cucumis sativus L. 
68 Pumpkin Cucurbita  moschata Duch. ex Poir. 
Annual Report 2021 -22 288 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 69 Barley Hordeum  vulgare L. 
70 Coriander  Coriandrum  sativum L. 
71 Fenugreek  Trigonella  foenum graecum L. 
72 Almond Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D.A. Webb  
73 Apple Malus domestica  Borkh 
74 Pear Pyrus communis  L. 
75 Apricot Prunus armeniaca  L. 
76 Cherry Prunus avium L. 
77 Walnut Juglans regia L. 
78 Grapes Vitis spp. 
79 Indian jujube (Ber)  Ziziphus mauritiana  Lamk. 
80 Tea Camellia sinensis 
81 Tea Camellia assamica  
82 Tea C.assamica  ssp lasiocalyx.  
83 Acid Lime  Citrus aurantifolia  Swingle 
84 Mandarin Citrus reticulata  Blanco 
85 Sweet Orange  Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck 
86 Bougainvillea  Bougainvillea Comm. Ex  Juss. 
87 Banana Musa spp. 
88 Orchid Oncidium  Sw. 
89 Canna Canna L. 
90 Gladioulus  Gladioulus  L. 
91 Muskmelon  Cucumis melo L. 
92 Watermelon  Citrullus Lanatus (Thunb.) Mansf. 
93 Jasmine Jasminum  auriculatum . L. 
94 Tuberose Polianthes  tuberose L. 
95 Papaya Carica papaya L. 
96 China Aster  Callistephus  chinensis (L.)Nees. 
97 Peach Prunus persica L Batsch. 
98 Japanese Plum  Prunus salicina L. 
99 Strawberry  Fragaria  x ananasan  Duch. 
100 Chilli, Bell Pepper and 
Paprika Capsicum  annuum L. 
101 Finger Millet  Eleusine coracana  (L.) Gaertn. 
102 Foxtail Millet  Setaria italic (L.) Beauv 
Annual Report 2021 -22 289 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 103 Vegetable Amaranth  Amaranthus  tricolor L. 
104 Ridge gourd  Luffa acutangula  (L.) Roxb. 
105 Spinach beet  Beta vulgaris var. bengalensis  Roxb. 
106 Carnation  Dianthus  caryophyllus  L. 
107 Orchid Paphiopedilum  Pfitz. 
108 Noni Morinda citrifolia L. 
109 Bael Aegle marmelos  (L.) Correa  
110 Jamun/Black plum  Syzygium  cumini (L.) Skeels. 
111 Nutmeg Myristica  fragrans Houtt. 
112 Jasmine/Mogra  Jasminum  sambac L. 
113 Custard apple / Sugar 
apple Annona squamosa  L. 
114 Kalmegh /King of 
Bitters Andrographis  paniculata  (Burm.f.) Wall. ex  Nees 
115 Karanj Pongamia  pinnata  (L.) Pierre.  
116 Neem Azadirachta  indica  A. Juss. 
117 Indian Gooseberry  Emblica officinalis  Gaertn. 
118 Guava Psidium guajava L. 
119 Litchi Litchi chinensis  Sonn. 
120 Marigold Tagetesspp.   L. 
121 Betelvine Piper betle L. 
122 Deodar Cedrus deodara (Roxb.) G.Don 
123 Chir Pine Pinus roxburghii  Sargent 
124 Mulberry Morus spp. 
125 Jasmine Jasminum  multiflorum  L. 
126 Common/ Sweet 
Buckwheat  Fagopyrum  esculentum  
127 Tartary/ Bitter 
Buckwheat  Fagopyrum  tataricum  
128 Rajgeera (the King's 
grain) or Ramdana (Lord 
Rama’s grain). Amaranthus  hypocondricus  
129 Amaranthus  cruentus 
130 Amaranthus  caudatus 
131 Amaranthus  edulis 
132 Faba bean Vicia faba L. 
133 Jatropha Jatropha curcas L. 
134 Proso Millet Panicum maliaceum  L. 
135 Barnyard Millet  Echinocloa  frumentaceae  (Roxb.) Link  
Annual Report 2021 -22 290 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 136 Little Millet  Panicum sumatrense  Roth. Ex. Roemer And  Schultes 
137 Kodo Millet Paspalum  scorbiculatum  L. 
138 Elephant Foot Yam  Amorphophallus  paeoniifolius  
139 Taro Colocasia  esculenta 
140 Giant SwampTaro  Cyrtosperma  chamissionis/C.merkusii  
141 Cashew Anacardium  occidental  L. 
142 Arecanut Areca catechu L. 
143 Chironji Buchananialanzan  Sperng. 
144 Tamarind Tamarindusindica  L. 
145 Sweet potato  Ipomoea batatas  (L.) Lam 
146 Cassava Manihotesculenta  Crantz. 
147 Poplar Populusdeltoides  Bartr. 
148-
154 Willow (7 species)  Salix tetrasperma, Salix nigra, Salix jessoensis, Salix x rubens, 
Salix matsudana, Salix alba, Salix acmophylla  . 
155 Oat Avena sativa  L. 
156 Date Palm  Phoenix dactylifera  L. 
157 Moringa Moringa oleifers  L. 
158 Melia Melia dubia  Cav. 
159 Pointed Gourd  Trichosanthes dioica  Roxb. 
160 Crossandra  Crossandra infundibuliformis  (L.) Nees.  
161 Cowpea Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp. ssp. unguiculata and Vigna 
unguiculata (L.) Walp. ssp. sesquipedalis (L.) Verdc.  (L.) Walp.  
162 Jackfruit Artocarpus heterophyllus  Lam. 
163 Greater Yam  Dioscorea alata  L. 
164 Yam Bean  Pachyrhizus erosus  ( L.) 
165 Seabuckthrorn  Hippophae rhamnoides  L. 
166 Ajwain Trachyspermum ammi  L. 
167 Anise Pimpenella anisum L. 
168 Celery  Apium graveolens  L. 
169 Cumin  Cuminum cyminum  L. 
170 Dill  Anethum graveolens  L. and Anethum sowa  Roxb 
171 Fennel Foeniculum vulgare  Mill. 
172 Nigella  Nigella sativa  L. 
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 291 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
  Annexure VIII: Certificates of Registration issued During 2021 -22 
 
S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
1 REG/2007/56  New MIJ-008 Sorghum M/s Crystal Crop 
Protection Limited  
2 REG/2008/522  Extant 
(VCK) LD 694 Diploid 
Cotton Punjab Agricultural 
University  
3 REG/2009/34  New KBR 837 Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
4 REG/2009/140  New NP-107-4 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
5 REG/2009/200  Extant 
(VCK) NC-183 Tetraploid 
Cotton Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
6 REG/2009/214  Extant 
(VCK) NC-1107 Tetraploid 
Cotton Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
7 REG/2009/231  Extant 
(VCK) NC-168 Tetraploid 
Cotton Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
8 REG/2010/68  New KBMS 261  Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
9 REG/2010/120  New KSR 6171  Sorghum Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
10 REG/2010/138  New KBMS 353  Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
11 REG/2010/162  New KBMS 229  Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
12 REG/2010/168  New KBR 672 Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
13 REG/2010/170  New KBR 882 Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
14 REG/2010/172  New KBR 880 Pearl Millet  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
15 REG/2010/259  New NP-6226 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
16 REG/2010/380  Extant 
(VCK) TM 61455  Tomato Mahyco Private Limited  
17 REG/2010/382  New TM 61483  Tomato Mahyco Private Limited  
18 REG/2010/383  New MOK 60027  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Mahyco Private Limited  
19 REG/2010/447  Extant 
(VCK) S-EP-041 Brinjal Mahyco Private Limited  
20 REG/2010/492  New BA-1006 Tomato Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
21 REG/2010/519  Extant 
(VCK) PSCP-02 Tetraploid 
Cotton Pravardhan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
Annual Report 2021 -22 292 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
22 REG/2010/521  Extant 
(VCK) PC-P201 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
23 REG/2010/522  Extant 
(VCK) PC-P701 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
24 REG/2010/531  Extant 
(VCK) PSCP-03 Tetraploid 
Cotton Pravardhan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
25 REG/2011/142  New KOL 1164  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
26 REG/2011/143  New KOL 1163  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
27 REG/2011/144  New KOL 1162  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
28 REG/2011/145  New KOL 1155  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
29 REG/2011/146  New KOL 1154  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
30 REG/2011/148  New KOL 1147  Okra/Lady's 
Finger Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
31 REG/2011/867  Farmer SUNA PANI -G Rice Bharat Gouda  
32 REG/2011/1345  New S-EP-061 Brinjal Mahyco Private Limited  
33 REG/2011/1349  New NPS-2309R Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
34 REG/2011/1350  New NPS-2001A Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
35 REG/2012/115  Extant 
(VCK) NBJ-66 Brinjal Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
36 REG/2012/209  New BJ 60309 Brinjal Mahyco Private Limited  
37 REG/2012/211  New BJ 60310 Brinjal Mahyco Private Limited  
38 REG/2012/241  New NP-947R Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
39 REG/2012/243  New NP-95151R Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
40 REG/2012/290  Extant 
(VCK) NBJ-N04 Brinjal Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
41 REG/2012/394  Extant 
(VCK) ACG-13-II 
(Ajeet-13-II) Tetraploid 
Cotton Ajeet Seeds Ltd  
42 REG/2013/87  New NC-173/1 BG-II Tetraploid 
Cotton Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
43 REG/2013/125  New NC-1161 Tetraploid 
Cotton Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
44 REG/2013/132  New KPP 4012  Pigeon pea  
Sunflower  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
45 REG/2013/216  Extant 
(Notified)  NSFH - 1001 Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
46 REG/2013/228  New PSCP 34 BG -I Tetraploid 
Cotton Pravardhan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
47 REG/2013/422  New JKC 1039 BGII  Tetraploid JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
Annual Report 2021 -22 293 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
Cotton 
48 REG/2013/423  New JKC 1034 BGII  Tetraploid 
Cotton JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
49 REG/2013/424  Extant 
(VCK) JKC 728 Tetraploid 
Cotton JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
50 REG/2013/426  New JKC 6067  Tetraploid 
Cotton JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
51 REG/2013/428  New JKC 7235  Tetraploid 
Cotton JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
52 REG/2013/474  New PAN-5010 Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
53 REG/2013/514  New BIO-E11 Brinjal DCM Shriram Limited  
54 REG/2013/515  New BIO-E10 Brinjal DCM Shriram Limited  
55 REG/2013/540  New KSF-413R Sunflower  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
56 REG/2013/544  New KSF-256A Sunflower  Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
57 REG/2013/630  Farmer BEGUNG 
(Panthan)  Brinjal Loko Farmer's Club  
58 REG/2013/670  New 279B Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
59 REG/2013/672 A  New 415A Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
60 REG/2013/672 B  New 415B Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
61 REG/2013/672 R  New CB 33 Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
62 REG/2013/872  New NP-4008 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd 
63 REG/2013/873  New NP-4004 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
64 REG/2013/954  New GG-04 Durum 
Wheat Green Gold Agritech (I)  
65 REG/2013/955  New GG-24 Wheat Green Gold Agritech (I)  
66 REG/2013/956  New GG-39 Wheat Green Gold Agritech (I)  
67 REG/2013/1171  Farmer ADI Black pepper  Poonacha N.N.  
68 REG/2013/1172  Extant 
(Notified)  Sabour Surbhit  Rice Bihar Agricultural 
University  
69 REG/2013/1282  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa-6 (IET 
22290) (Pusa 
1612-07-6-5) Rice Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute  
70 REG/2013/1309  Farmer RAGHUSAL  Rice Anjan Kumar Sinha  
71 REG/2014/177  Farmer SAGG BHAT  Rice Seed Saver Farmers' 
Group 
72 REG/2014/446  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P501 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
Annual Report 2021 -22 294 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
73 REG/2014/447  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P031 Bt Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
74 REG/2014/449  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P251 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
75 REG/2014/453  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P311 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
76 REG/2014/463  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P371 Bt Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
77 REG/2014/469  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P961 Bt2 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
78 REG/2014/470  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P071 Bt2 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
79 REG/2014/472  Extant 
(VCK) PC - P851 Bt2 Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
80 REG/2014/480  New PC - P3812/2 BG -
II Tetraploid 
Cotton Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd  
81 REG/2014/493  New NP - 11 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
82 REG/2014/494  New NP - 9745 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
83 REG/2014/534  Farmer JOPA 
MANIPURI  Rice Ananta Singphow  
84 REG/2014/546  Farmer MAIDANG 
CHANG NNENG  Rice Ananta Singphow  
85 REG/2014/551  Farmer MYOCHANG  Rice Ananta Singphow  
86 REG/2014/554  Farmer LOTHABOR  Rice Ananta Singphow  
87 REG/2014/556  Farmer KABRI Rice Ananta Singphow  
88 REG/2014/628  New BIO TS 270  Tomato DCM Shriram Limited  
89 REG/2014/877  Farmer Balinta pesalu  Green gram  Biodiversity Management 
Committee  
90 REG/2014/899  Farmer RUNNA 
CHANNA  Chickpea Ram Chandra Prasad 
Singh 
91 REG/2014/980  New NP-9164 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
92 REG/2014/981  New NP-4228 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
93 REG/2014/982  New NP-20-2-1 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
94 REG/2014/983  New NP-4201 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
95 REG/2014/985  New BHIMA DARK 
RED (NRCRO -
3/RGO-53) Onion Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
96 REG/2014/1063  New EAGLE-145 Durum 
Wheat Eagle Seeds & Biotech 
Ltd 
97 REG/2014/1174  Farmer SATI Rice Dipak Mondal  
98 REG/2014/1179  Farmer HETOMARI  Rice Manash Kumar Roy  
99 REG/2014/1181  Farmer SANKENE  Rice Lakshan Pramanick  
100 REG/2014/1182  Farmer GOCHI Rice Dilip Kumar Sarkar  
101 REG/2014/1188  Farmer MURGI BALAM  Rice Bishwanath Mondal  
Annual Report 2021 -22 295 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
102 REG/2014/1189  Farmer JHINGESAL  Rice Bishwanath Mondal  
103 REG/2014/1190  Farmer MEGHI Rice Dilip Kumar Sarkar  
104 REG/2014/1191  Farmer CHINGRI FULI  Rice Dilip Kumar Sarkar  
105 REG/2014/1192  Farmer BAKU Rice Dilip Kumar Sarkar  
106 REG/2014/1275  New NP-125 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
107 REG/2014/1276  New NP-9311 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
108 REG/2014/1277  New NP-9946 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
109 REG/2014/1287  New CR 2829-PLN-23 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
110 REG/2014/1288  New CR 2829-PLN-
100 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
111 REG/2014/1289  New CR 2829-PLN-
116 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
112 REG/2014/1290  New CR 2830-PLS-
124 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
113 REG/2014/1721  New KCL-10 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
114 REG/2014/1726  New KCL-19 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
115 REG/2014/1727  New KCL-17 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
116 REG/2014/1728  New KCL-16 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
117 REG/2014/1730  New KCL-24 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
118 REG/2014/1731  New KCL-23 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
119 REG/2014/1732  New KCL-22 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
120 REG/2014/1736  New KCL-2 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
121 REG/2014/1737  New KCL-3 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
122 REG/2014/1740  New KCL-6 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
123 REG/2014/1895  New KCL-41 Tetraploid 
Cotton Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
124 REG/2014/2019  New MRP 5491  Rice Mahyco Private Limited  
125 REG/2014/2029  New CR 2830-PLS-
156 Rice Indian Council  of 
Agricultural Research  
126 REG/2014/2030  New CR 2829-PLN-98 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
127 REG/2014/2031  New CR 2829-PLN-32 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
Annual Report 2021 -22 296 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
128 REG/2014/2033  New CR 2829-PLN-99 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
129 REG/2014/2034  New CR 2829-PLN-37 Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
130 REG/2014/2125  Farmer Deshi Kareli  Bitter Gourd  Adresh Kumar  
131 REG/2014/2126  Farmer Sweta Bottle Gourd  Rajghri Singh  
132 REG/2014/2129  Farmer Deshi Long  Bottle Gourd  Anikate Kumar  
133 REG/2014/2133  Farmer Adresh Round  Brinjal Dilip Kumar Singh  
134 REG/2014/2137  Farmer Chuti Sunahari  Lentil Montu Kumar  
135 REG/2014/2166  Farmer Sonachur 
Sugandhit  Rice Prantap Kumar  
136 REG/2014/2234  New MHC4T007  Maize Metahelix Life Sciences 
Limited 
137 REG/2014/2293  Farmer PRATAY -RAN Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
138 REG/2014/2314  Farmer SHATABDI  Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society) 
139 REG/2014/2317  Farmer MASHURI -II Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
140 REG/2014/2322  Farmer SABITRI -I Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
141 REG/2014/2327  Farmer SAJANI Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
142 REG/2014/2328  Farmer RIYA Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
143 REG/2014/2357  New GK951 Sorghum Ganga Kaveri Seeds Pvt 
Ltd 
144 REG/2014/2377  New GK950 Sorghum Ganga Kaveri Seeds Pvt 
Ltd 
145 REG/2014/2402  New GK952 Sorghum Ganga Kaveri Seeds Pvt 
Ltd 
146 REG/2014/2419  New JKR 06128  Pearl Millet  JK Agri Genetics Ltd  
147 REG/2014/2423  New AEL-7 Brinjal Ajeet Seeds Ltd  
148 REG/2014/2424  New AEL-114-1 Brinjal Ajeet Seeds Ltd  
149 REG/2014/2426  New AEL-194 Brinjal Ajeet Seeds Ltd  
150 REG/2014/2427  New AEL-172 Brinjal Ajeet Seeds Ltd  
151 REG/2015/213  New NPS-2111 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
Annual Report 2021 -22 297 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
152 REG/2015/301  New PMGP100001A  Pearl Millet  Metahelix Life Sciences 
Limited 
153 REG/2015/314  Farmer Baigan-GL Brinjal Birendra Singh  
154 REG/2015/328  New NP-7060 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
155 REG/2015/329  New NP-7002 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
156 REG/2015/330  New NP-7009 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
157 REG/2015/331  Farmer SHARBATI  Rice Prabhpal Singh Dhillon  
158 REG/2015/358  Farmer LAL 
BADSHABHOG  Rice Dalpur Sree Sree 
Gyanananda Saraswati 
Ashram 
159 REG/2015/363  Extant 
(Notified)  MUGAD SIRI -
1253 Rice University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
160 REG/2015/409  Farmer Desi Garma 
Mung Green gram  Vinay Kumar Yadav  
161 REG/2015/443  New HR411127R  Rice DCM Shriram Limited  
162 REG/2015/673  New NP-9380 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
163 REG/2015/674  New NP-9560 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
164 REG/2015/675  New NP-9731 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
165 REG/2015/680  New NP-9368 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
166 REG/2015/681  New NP-9359 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
167 REG/2015/682  New NP-9561 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
168 REG/2015/807  New MZ14SO14N  Maize Metahelix Life Sciences 
Limited 
169 REG/2015/923  Extant 
(VCK) NFS-607 Watermelon  Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
170 REG/2015/925  Extant 
(VCK) NFS-609 Watermelon  Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
171 REG/2015/926  Extant 
(VCK) NFS-608 Watermelon  Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
172 REG/2015/1009  New PH1RA9 Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
173 REG/2015/1011  New PH2RBR  Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
174 REG/2015/1012  New PH217Z Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
175 REG/2015/1160  Farmer NMS-2 Rice M.K. Shankarguru  
176 REG/2015/1166  New M172R Pearl Millet  Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
177 REG/2015/1273  New RA320 Rice Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
178 REG/2015/1276  New RA401F Rice Pioneer Overseas 
Annual Report 2021 -22 298 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
Corporation  
179 REG/2015/1658  New IFGTB-CJ-9 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
180 REG/2015/1659  New IFGTB-EC-6 Eucalyptus  Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
181 REG/2015/1666  New MZ14S018N  Maize Metahelix Life Sciences 
Limited 
182 REG/2015/1670  Farmer KASHIYA 
BINNI Rice Punjan Barman  
183 REG/2015/1671  Farmer KATARIBHOG  Rice Punjan Barman  
184 REG/2015/1677  Farmer LAL DHYAPA  Rice Punjan Barman  
185 REG/2015/1680  Farmer MALSHIRA  Rice Punjan Barman  
186 REG/2015/1685  Farmer PHOOL PAKRI  Rice Punjan Barman  
187 REG/2015/1688  Farmer SADA MALA  Rice Punjan Barman  
188 REG/2015/1690  Farmer SESHA PHAL  Rice Ashamanjon Barman  
189 REG/2015/1700  Farmer SESHA PHAL -1 Rice Ashamanjon Barman  
190 REG/2015/1701  Farmer SHIAL 
BHOMRA  Rice Punjan Barman  
191 REG/2015/1703  Farmer SITALKUCHI -1 Rice Ramkrishna Barman 
192 REG/2015/1704  Farmer SITALKUCHI -2 Rice Ramkrishna Barman  
193 REG/2015/1705  Farmer SITALKUCHI -3 Rice Ramkrishna Barman  
194 REG/2015/1707  Farmer SITALKUCHI -5 Rice Ramkrishna Barman  
195 REG/2015/1708  Farmer SITALKUCHI -6 Rice Punjan Barman  
196 REG/2015/1709  Farmer SUNGA BORO  Rice Saren Roy  
197 REG/2015/1710  Farmer TARA PAKRI  Rice Punjan Barman  
198 REG/2015/1712  Farmer TARA PAKRI 
SELECTION -1 Rice Punjan Barman  
199 REG/2015/1719  Farmer TULSHIBHOG  Rice Punjan Barman  
200 REG/2015/1720  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-1 Rice Punjan Barman  
201 REG/2015/1721  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-2 Rice Punjan Barman  
202 REG/2015/1722  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-3 Rice Punjan Barman  
203 REG/2015/1723  Farmer UTTAR BANGA Rice Punjan Barman  
Annual Report 2021 -22 299 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
LOCAL-4 
204 REG/2015/1724  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-5 Rice Punjan Barman  
205 REG/2015/1741  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-18 Rice Punjan Barman  
206 REG/2015/1742  Farmer UTTAR BANGA 
LOCAL-19 Rice Punjan Barman  
207 REG/2015/1747  Farmer KHATO 
SARSON  Rapeseed 
(Toria) Punjan Barman  
208 REG/2015/1792  Extant 
(VCK) CIM-KRANTI  Menthol 
Mint Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research  
209 REG/2015/1801  Farmer SUGANDHASA
L-II Rice Amarkanan Rural Socio -
Environmental Welfare 
Society (ARSW Society)  
210 REG/2015/2018  Extant 
(Notified)  BHIMA SUPER Onion Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
211 REG/2016/3  Farmer NAGAVI 
MALDANDI  Sorghum Siddarameshwar 
Sajjanshetly  
212 REG/2016/5  New PP56 Pearl Millet  Bayer Crop Science LP  
213 REG/2016/6  New PSP66 Pearl Millet  Bayer Crop Science LP  
214 REG/2016/68  New M297F Pearl Millet  Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
215 REG/2016/70  Extant 
(VCK) JI0801FC  Indian 
Mustard 
(Sarso) Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
216 REG/2016/232  Extant 
(Notified)  GNR-4 Rice Navsari Agricultural 
University  
217 REG/2016/354  Extant 
(VCK) Arka Swadesh  Rose Indian Institute of 
Horticultural Research  
218 REG/2016/405  Extant 
(VCK) R849 Rice Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
219 REG/2016/421  Extant 
(Notified)  DBW 93 Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
220 REG/2016/433  Farmer Jeera Pratap  Rice Sukesh Kumar  
221 REG/2016/452  Farmer Kanak Rice Sahendra Das  
222 REG/2016/474  Farmer Balakis Rice Indradev Yadav  
223 REG/2016/527  New RA403F Rice Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
224 REG/2016/553  New NQP-23 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
225 REG/2016/554  New NP - 9995 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
226 REG/2016/555  New NP - 9862 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
227 REG/2016/556  New NP - 10026 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
Annual Report 2021 -22 300 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
228 REG/2016/557  New NP - 9807 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
229 REG/2016/558  New NP - 7811 Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
230 REG/2016/563  Farmer PRERNA  Indian 
Mustard 
(Sarso) Rohtash Singh  
231 REG/2016/685  Farmer SKF-WD-7003 Durum 
Wheat N.S. Sipani  
232 REG/2016/686  Farmer SKF-WA 2022 Wheat N.S. Sipani  
233 REG/2016/687  Farmer SKF-WA 462 
(WAMAN)  Wheat N.S. Sipani  
234 REG/2016/688  Farmer SKF-C N-5 Wheat N.S. Sipani  
235 REG/2016/689  Farmer SKF-WA 6051 Wheat N.S. Sipani  
236 REG/2016/690  Farmer SKF-WA 6058 Wheat N.S. Sipani  
237 REG/2016/691  Farmer SKF-SPS-11 Soybean N.S. Sipani  
238 REG/2016/692  Farmer SKF-433 Soybean N.S. Sipani  
239 REG/2016/693  Farmer SKF-148 Soybean N.S. Sipani  
240 REG/2016/694  Farmer SKF-BS-9 Soybean N.S. Sipani  
241 REG/2016/695  Farmer SKF-1050 Soybean N.S. Sipani  
242 REG/2016/771  New BIO EM189Z  Pearl Millet  DCM Shriram Limited  
243 REG/2016/804  Extant 
(Notified)  Mash 1008  Black gram  Punjab Agricultural 
University  
244 REG/2016/938  New TH-AYB 20217  Maize Bisco Biosciences Pvt Ltd  
245 REG/2016/949  Farmer Chwar Dhan  Rice Yudhveer Singh Rawat  
246 REG/2016/988  Extant 
(Notified)  
Extant 
(Notified)  KASHI AMAN 
(VRT0801)  Tomato Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
247 REG/2016/1307  RH 0406 Indian 
Mustard 
(Sarso) Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
248 REG/2016/1308  Extant 
(Notified)  RH 0749 Indian 
Mustard 
(Sarso) Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
249 REG/2016/1332  Extant 
(Notified)  Bhavapuri 
Sannalu Rice Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
250 REG/2016/1339  Extant 
(Notified)  NANDYALA 
SONA Rice Acharya N.G. Ranga 
Agricultural University  
251 REG/2016/1387  Extant 
(Notified)  MP 3382 (JW 
3382) Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
Annual Report 2021 -22 301 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
252 REG/2016/1739  Extant 
(Notified)  Pant Basmati 2  Rice G.B. Pant University of 
Agriculture & 
Technology  
253 REG/2016/1832  Farmer TICHIN Rice Mr. Balkrishna Kanu 
Daul 
254 REG/2016/1943  Farmer KHAMBA 
PHOU Rice Sh. Ningombam Khamba 
Meitei 
255 REG/2016/1944  Farmer Sanayambi Phou  Rice Sh. Chanambam 
Sanayamba Meitei  
256 REG/2017/132  Farmer Koriya Maize Shyam Munda  
257 REG/2017/152  Extant 
(Notified)  MPO (JW) 1255 Durum 
Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
258 REG/2017/328  Farmer Safed Bhundi  Sorghum Anantram Yadav  
259 REG/2017/331  Farmer Krishna Jwar  Barley Rambhajan Yadav  
260 REG/2017/339  Farmer Jwa Nathuram  Barley Nathu Ram Vishwakarma  
261 REG/2017/534  Farmer Jwa Gajendra  Barley Gajendra Singh  
262 REG/2017/541  Farmer Jhundi Jwar 
Nirpat Sorghum Nirpat Singh  
263 REG/2017/739  Farmer Gajpal Jowar  Sorghum Gajpal Dhurve  
264 REG/2017/1060  Farmer Jwar Kutki  Sorghum Bablu 
265 REG/2017/1434  Farmer LALL 
BASANADHAN  Rice Kadambini Behera  
266 REG/2017/1435  Farmer LALL S-13 Rice Abani Behera  
267 REG/2017/1436  Farmer RATNA MENTI  Rice Ashok Kumar Barik  
268 REG/2017/1437  Farmer LALL S-5 Rice Bijaya Kumar Patra  
269 REG/2017/1438  Farmer LALL MANI  Rice Sudhiranjan Barik  
270 REG/2017/1440  Farmer LALL PARI  Rice Krushna Chandra Swain  
271 REG/2017/1441  Farmer LALL KUBERA  Rice Kshetramohan Behera  
272 REG/2017/1442  Farmer KESHO PHOU  Rice Wahengbam Kesho Singh  
273 REG/2017/1443  Farmer Kathai Phou  Rice Lairenlakpam Indrajit 
Meetei 
274 REG/2017/1444  Farmer Darum Phou  Rice Sorokhaibam Sanajaoba 
Meitei 
275 REG/2017/1445  Farmer Rajen Phou  Rice Ngangom Rajen Singh  
276 REG/2017/1564  New IFGTB-CH-1 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
Annual Report 2021 -22 302 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
277 REG/2017/1565  New IFGTB-CH-2 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
278 REG/2017/1566  New IFGTB-CH-3 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
279 REG/2017/1567  New IFGTB-CH-4 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree  
Breeding 
280 REG/2017/1568  New IFGTB-CH-5 Casurina Institute of Forest 
Genetics and Tree 
Breeding 
281 REG/2017/1607  Extant 
(VCK) VNR BIHI  Guava VNR Seeds Pvt Ltd  
282 REG/2017/1643  Farmer Sulkhaniya Bajra  Pearl Millet  Shri. Hanumanaram 
Jhuriya 
283 REG/2017/1770  New Arka Ivory  Rose Indian Institute of 
Horticultural Research  
284 REG/2017/1792  Farmer GPT-1 Pigeon pea  Goudappa Bhimashankar 
Patil 
285 REG/2017/1898  Extant 
(VCK) DOLLY Potato Germicopa Sas  
286 REG/2017/1899  Extant 
(VCK) SASSY Potato Germicopa Sas  
287 REG/2017/1900  Extant 
(VCK) NAFIDA  Potato Germicopa Sas  
288 REG/2017/1901  Extant 
(VCK) EDONY Potato Germicopa Sas  
289 REG/2017/1917  Extant 
(Notified)  PHULE 
SAMADHAN 
(NIAW 1994)  Wheat Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
290 REG/2017/2297 H  Extant 
(Notified)  DRONA (KMH -
2589) Maize Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
291 REG/2017/2297 
P1 Extant 
(Notified)  KML2924  Maize Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
292 REG/2017/2297 
P2 Extant 
(Notified)  KML2323  Maize Kaveri Seed Company 
Ltd 
293 REG/2017/2298  Extant 
(VCK) SRW231 Wheat DCM Shriram Limited  
294 REG/2017/2299  Extant 
(VCK) SRW 252 Wheat DCM Shriram Limited  
295 REG/2017/2300  Extant 
(VCK) SRW 303 Wheat DCM Shriram Limited  
296 REG/2017/2301  Extant 
(VCK) SRW 404 Wheat DCM Shriram Limited  
297 REG/2017/2302  Extant 
(VCK) SRW 111 Wheat DCM Shriram Limited  
298 REG/2017/2311  Farmer NARENDRA 09  Wheat Narendra Singh Mehra  
299 REG/2017/2312  New PH2YNZ  Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Annual Report 2021 -22 303 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
Corporation  
300 REG/2017/2370  New PH2NFT Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
301 REG/2017/2371  New PH177S Maize Pioneer Overseas 
Corporation  
302 REG/2018/68  Farmer BARTIA Rice Pragati Self Help Group  
303 REG/2018/74  New AN-5268 Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
304 REG/2018/84  Farmer MANIRATNAM  Rice Chandra Shekhar Singh  
305 REG/2018/86  Farmer Vasundhara 
Madhuri 5555  Rice Chandra Shekhar Singh  
306 REG/2018/87  Farmer Vasundhara 
Khushboo  Rice Chandra Shekhar Singh  
307 REG/2018/88  Farmer Vasundhara 
Aman Rice Chandra Shekhar Singh  
308 REG/2018/96  Extant 
(Notified)  CSV 33 MF 
(SPV-2242) Sorghum Indian Council  of 
Agricultural Research  
309 REG/2018/150  Farmer TIEW 
LYNGKSIAR 
DOHNUD  Orchid Charles Tympuin  
310 REG/2018/151  Farmer TIEW 
LYNGKSIAR 
LIENG Orchid Charles Tympuin  
311 REG/2018/152  Farmer TIEW 
LYNGSKAW  Orchid Charles Tympuin  
312 REG/2018/153  Farmer TIEW 
KYRWOHKAW  Orchid Charles Tympuin  
313 REG/2018/154  Farmer TIEW 
TDONGRISANG  Orchid Charles Tympuin  
314 REG/2018/319  Extant 
(Notified)  DEHANGI  Rice Assam Agricultural 
University  
315 REG/2018/325  Farmer CBCM-206 Chickpea Bullu Maurya  
316 REG/2018/327  Farmer CJRA-208 Chickpea Jagvanti Devi  
317 REG/2018/388  Farmer CLCM-279 Chickpea Lalji Prasad Verma  
318 REG/2018/409  Farmer CCRA-300 Chickpea Chandrabhan Singh  
319 REG/2018/412  Farmer CJRB-303 Chickpea Jagvanti Devi  
320 REG/2018/531  Farmer SBG-997 Soybean Suresh Bapurao Garmade  
321 REG/2018/677  Farmer UJALA CH -3 Chickpea Satya Dev Singh  
322 REG/2018/694  New MALAV-221 Durum 
Wheat Malav Seeds Pvt. Ltd.  
323 REG/2019/5  Extant 
(VCK) MANJARI 
KISHMISH  Grapes ICAR-National Research 
Centre for Grapes  
324 REG/2019/6  Extant 
(VCK) MANJARI 
NAVEEN  Grapes ICAR-National Research 
Centre for Grapes  
325 REG/2019/11  Farmer SIGANDINI  Black pepper  Ramakanth Ramachandra 
Hegde 
326 REG/2019/113 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Karimnagar 
Makka-1 (KNMH 
4010131) Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
Annual Report 2021 -22 304 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
327 REG/2019/113 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  PFSR-3 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
328 REG/2019/113 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  BML-7 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
329 REG/2019/135  Extant 
(VCK) Swarna Sawani  Ridge gourd  Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
330 REG/2019/152  Extant 
(Notified)  RVK 11 Tetraploid 
Cotton 
Okra/Lady's 
Finger Rajmata Vijayaraje 
Scindia Krishi Vishwa 
Vidyalaya  
331 REG/2019/175  Extant 
(Notified)  PHULE 
VIMUKTA  Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
332 REG/2020/18  Extant 
(Notified)  BCCC-1, Shweta  Jute Bidhan Chandra Krishi 
Viswavidyalaya  
333 REG/2020/27  Extant 
(Notified)  KARAN 
MALTSONA 
(DWRB 160)  Barley Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
334 REG/2020/40  Extant 
(Notified)  SUJAY (SCS  
793) Tetraploid 
Cotton University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
335 REG/2020/42  Extant 
(Notified)  BGDS 1063  Tetraploid 
Cotton University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
336 REG/2020/43  Extant 
(Notified)  SCS 1061  Tetraploid 
Cotton University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
337 REG/2020/51  Extant 
(Notified)  KBGA-1 Rajgeera University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
338 REG/2020/61 H  Extant 
(Notified)  MP 3030 Rice Mahindra Agri solutions 
Ltd 
339 REG/2020/61 A  Extant 
(VCK) 100727A Rice Mahindra Agri solutions 
Ltd 
340 REG/2020/61 B Extant 
(VCK) 100727B Rice Mahindra Agri solutions 
Ltd 
341 REG/2020/61 R  Extant 
(VCK) 100874R Rice Mahindra Agri solutions 
Ltd 
342 REG/2020/74 H  Extant 
(Notified)  ADV 756 (ADV 
0990296) Maize UPL Limited  
343 REG/2020/74 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  330086 Maize UPL Limited  
344 REG/2020/74 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  330084 Maize UPL Limited  
345 REG/2020/94  Extant 
(Notified)  NP 9359-9 
(Sandhya)  Rice Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd  
346 REG/2020/95  Extant 
(Notified)  YNP-9761 (IET 
24338)(YNP 
9761) Rice Yaaganti Seeds Pvt ltd  
347 REG/2020/97  Farmer VSD Seedless  Grapes Pradeep Shankar Desai, 
Vijay Shankar, Dilip 
Shankar Desai  
348 REG/2020/98  Farmer KING BERRY  Grapes Dattatraya Nanasaheb 
Kale 
349 REG/2020/99  Farmer RK SEEDLESS  Grapes Raghunath Kedari 
Annual Report 2021 -22 305 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
Zambre 
350 REG/2020/100 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Uday (DMR -248) 
Mahabeej -1114 Maize Maharashtra State Seeds 
Corporation Ltd.  
351 REG/2020/100 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  S-9-F-
11(CMS013004X
CMS003146) -3-
9-1-11 Maize Maharashtra State Seeds 
Corporation Ltd.  
352 REG/2020/100 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  S-9-M-14 Maize Maharashtra State Seeds 
Corporation Ltd.  
353 REG/2020/103  Extant 
(Notified)  CO 30 Sorghum Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
354 REG/2020/104  Extant 
(Notified)  Blackgram VBN 
6 Black gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
355 REG/2020/105  Extant 
(Notified)  Blackgram VBN 
9 Black gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
356 REG/2020/106  Extant 
(Notified)  Blackgram VBN 
10 Black gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
357 REG/2020/107  Extant 
(Notified)  Sorghum k 12 
(TKSV 0809)  Sorghum Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
358 REG/2020/108  Extant 
(Notified)  Paiyur 2 (DPI 
20030) Finger Millet  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
359 REG/2020/109  Extant 
(Notified)  Greengram VBN 
4 Green gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
360 REG/2020/110  Extant 
(Notified)  CO 9 (CRG 2012 -
25) Pigeon pea  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
361 REG/2020/111  Extant 
(Notified)  Blackgram VBN 
8 Black gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
362 REG/2020/112  Extant 
(Notified)  Greengram 
VBN(Gg) 3  Green gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
363 REG/2020/114 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Pearl millet 
HYBRID CO 9  Pearl Millet  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
364 REG/2020/114 A  Extant 
(Notified)  ICMA 93111A  Pearl Millet  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
365 REG/2020/114 B  Extant 
(Notified)  ICMB 93111B  Pearl Millet  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
366 REG/2020/114 R  Extant 
(Notified)  PT 6029-30 Pearl Millet  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
Annual Report 2021 -22 306 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
367 REG/2020/116  Extant 
(Notified)  Gujarat Fodder 
Sorghum-6 (GFS-
6) Sorghum Navsari Agricultural 
University  
368 REG/2020/117  Extant 
(Notified)  Gujarat Navsari 
Jowar-1 (GNJ-1) Sorghum Navsari Agricultural 
University  
369 REG/2020/137  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa Wheat 1621 
(HI 1621) Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
370 REG/2020/138  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa Wheat 1620 
(HI 1620)  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
371 REG/2020/139  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa Wheat 8805 
(HI 8805)  Durum 
Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
372 REG/2020/140  Extant 
(Notified)  PUSA WHEAT 
8802 (HI 8802)  Durum 
Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
373 REG/2020/141  Extant 
(Notified)  PUSA WHEAT 
1628 (HI 1628)  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
374 REG/2020/142  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Gehun 3004  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
375 REG/2020/143  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Gehun 953  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
376 REG/2020/144  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Gehun 2014  Wheat Indian Council  of 
Agricultural Research  
377 REG/2020/145  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Gehun 967  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
378 REG/2020/146  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa Wheat 3249 
(HD 3226)  Wheat Director ICAR -Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute 
379 REG/2020/149  Extant 
(Notified)  HD 3237 (Pusa 
Wheat 3237)  Wheat Director ICAR -Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute 
380 REG/2020/150  Extant 
(Notified)  HD 3271 Wheat Director ICAR -Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute 
381 REG/2020/151  Extant 
(Notified)  HS562 (Central 
Wheat HS562)  Wheat Director ICAR -Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute 
382 REG/2020/152  Extant 
(Notified)  HS542 (Pusa 
Kiran) Wheat Director ICAR -Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute 
383 REG/2020/155  Extant 
(Notified)  K-12 Diploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
384 REG/2020/157  Extant 
(Notified)  CO-14 Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
385 REG/2020/158  Extant 
(Notified)  Cotton CO 15 
(TCH 1705)  Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
Annual Report 2021 -22 307 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
386 REG/2020/159  Extant 
(Notified)  Cotton CO 16 
(TCH 1777)  Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
387 REG/2020/160  Extant 
(Notified)  VGD 1 (VG 
09006) (IET 
24606) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
388 REG/2020/161  Extant 
(Notified)  CO52 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
389 REG/2020/162  Extant 
(Notified)  CO(R)48 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
390 REG/2020/163  Extant 
(Notified)  CO 43 SUB -1 
(IET 25676)  Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
391 REG/2020/167  Extant 
(Notified)  Rice CR 1009 
Sub 1 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
392 REG/2020/168 H  Extant 
(Notified)  CORH 3 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
393 REG/2020/168 A  Extant 
(VCK) TNAU CMS 2A  Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
394 REG/2020/168 B  Extant 
(VCK) TNAU CMS 2B 
(CB 9736)  Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
395 REG/2020/168 R  Extant 
(VCK) CB87R Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
396 REG/2020/170  Extant 
(Notified)  Blackgram KKM 
1 (KKB 0511)  Black gram  Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
397 REG/2020/171  Extant 
(Notified)  MDU1 (ACM 10 
145) Barnyard 
Millet Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
398 REG/2020/172  Extant 
(Notified)  ADT 6 (ADBG 
13004) Black gram Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
399 REG/2020/173  Extant 
(Notified)  Perennial Fodder 
Sorghum CO 31  Sorghum Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
400 REG/2020/174  Extant 
(Notified)  UAS-466 Durum 
Wheat University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
401 REG/2020/229 H  Extant 
(Notified)  US 303 (IET 
25804) Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
402 REG/2020/229 A  Extant 
(VCK) F-5030 A Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
403 REG/2020/229 B  Extant 
(VCK) F-5030 B Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
404 REG/2020/229 R  Extant M-6834-4 Rice Seed Works International 
Annual Report 2021 -22 308 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
(VCK) Pvt Ltd 
405 REG/2020/230 H  Extant 
(Notified)  US 380 (IET 
25728) Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
406 REG/2020/230 A  Extant 
(VCK) F-5014 A Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
407 REG/2020/230 B  Extant 
(VCK) F-5014 B Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
408 REG/2020/230 R  Extant 
(VCK) M-1066 Rice Seed Works International 
Pvt Ltd 
409 REG/2020/232  Extant 
(Notified)  TRY 3, TR 2003 
025 (IET 19673) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
410 REG/2020/233  Extant 
(Notified)  ADT 52, AD 
13121 (IET 
25521) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
411 REG/2020/235  Extant 
(Notified)  TM07278 (TKM 
14) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
412 REG/2020/242  Extant 
(Notified)  SVPR4 (TSH 
9704) Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
413 REG/2020/243  Extant 
(Notified)  SVPR5 (TSH -
0250) Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
414 REG/2020/244  Extant 
(Notified)  SVPR 6 (TSH -
04/115) Tetraploid 
Cotton Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
415 REG/2020/245  Extant 
(Notified)  TKM 13 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
416 REG/2020/247  Extant 
(Notified)  ADT53, AD 
07073 (IET 
23955) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
417 REG/2020/248  Extant 
(Notified)  ADT 51, AD 
09367 (IET 
23617) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
418 REG/2020/249  Extant 
(Notified)  Anna(R) 4  Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
419 REG/2020/250  Extant 
(Notified)  MDU 6 (IET 
23994) Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
420 REG/2020/302 H  Extant 
(Notified)  PAN 2423  Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
421 REG/2020/302 A  Extant 
(Notified)  25A Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
422 REG/2020/302 B  Extant 
(Notified)  25B Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
423 REG/2020/302 R  Extant 
(Notified)  AN 138 Rice Pan Seeds Pvt Ltd  
424 REG/2020/303  Extant TNAU RICE Rice Director of Research, 
Annual Report 2021 -22 309 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
(Notified)  ADT50 
(IET19159)(ADO
2235) Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
425 REG/2020/304  Extant 
(Notified)  ADT 49 Rice Director of Research, 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
426 REG/2020/306  Extant 
(Notified)  SPV-2217 Sorghum University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
427 REG/2020/324  Extant 
(Notified)  DH 114(Him 
Pratham) Wheat CSK Himachal Pradesh 
Krishi Vishvavidyalaya  
428 REG/2020/325 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Pratap Hybrid 
Maize-3 (PH-
1974) Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
429 REG/2020/325 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  EI-586-2 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
430 REG/2020/325 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  EI-670-2 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
431 REG/2020/326 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Pant Pop corn 1 
(DPCH-306) Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
432 REG/2020/326 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  DPCI 508  Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
433 REG/2020/326 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  DPCI 513  Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
434 REG/2020/327 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa Jawahar 
Hybrid Maize -1 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
435 REG/2020/327 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  PML-93 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
436 REG/2020/327 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  PML-105 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
437 REG/2020/329 H  Extant 
(Notified)  Central Maize 
Sweet Corn 1 
(FSCH 18)  Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
438 REG/2020/329 P1  Extant 
(Notified)  VSL 16 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
439 REG/2020/329 P2  Extant 
(Notified)  VSL 4 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
440 REG/2020/331  Extant 
(Notified)  GNR-6 (NVSR-
2031) Rice Navsari Agricultural 
University  
441 REG/2020/333  Extant 
(Notified)  GRG 152 
(Bheema)  Pigeon pea  University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
442 REG/2020/334  Extant 
(Notified)  MABC-WR-SA1 
(Super Annigeri -
1) Chickpea University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
443 REG/2020/335  Extant 
(Notified)  GS-23 
(KANAKA)  Sorghum Dr. G. Girish, Scientist 
(GBP) 
444 REG/2020/337  Extant 
(Notified)  RAJ VIJAY 
JOWAR 1862  Sorghum Director, Rajmata 
Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi 
Vishwa Vidyalaya  
445 REG/2020/338  Extant 
(Notified)  Him Palam 
Gehun2 (HPW 
368) Wheat CSK Himachal Pradesh 
Krishi Vishvavidyalaya  
Annual Report 2021 -22 310 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
446 REG/2020/339  Extant 
(Notified)  WANI 103 
(PDKV HURDA 
KARTIKI)  Sorghum Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh 
Krishi Vidyapeeth  
447 REG/2020/386  Extant 
(Notified)  Palam Triloki  Garden pea  CSK Himachal Pradesh 
Krishi Vishvavidyalaya  
448 REG/2020/387  Extant 
(Notified)  PALAM 
SUMOOL  Garden pea  CSK Himachal Pradesh 
Krishi Vishvavidyalaya  
449 REG/2021/4  Extant 
(Notified)  GNV 10-89 (IET 
24716) Rice University of Agricultural 
and Horticultural 
Sciences 
450 REG/2021/5  Extant 
(Notified)  ADILABAD  
KAPAS-1 Tetraploid 
Cotton Professor Jayashankar 
Telangana State 
Agricultural University  
451 REG/2021/7  Extant 
(Notified)  PHULE 
RAJMAH (GRB -
902) Kidney bean  Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
452 REG/2021/0012 H  Extant 
(Notified)  PHULE SUMAN 
(RHH-1007) Tetraploid 
Cotton Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
453 REG/2021/0012 
P1 Extant 
(Notified)  RHC-566/1-1 Tetraploid 
Cotton Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
454 REG/2021/0012 
P2 Extant 
(Notified)  RHCr-0610 Tetraploid 
Cotton Mahatma Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth  
455 REG/2021/0013  Extant 
(Notified)  JAICAR SONA 
(CSV 39/SPV 
2358) Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
456 REG/2021/0014  Extant 
(Notified)  JAICAR HEERA 
(CSV 36/SPV 
2301) Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
457 REG/2021/0015  Extant 
(Notified)  CSV 40F (SPV 
2387) Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
458 REG/2021/0016  Extant 
(Notified)  Telangana Jonna 
1 (CSV 41/SPV 
2437) Sorghum Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
459 REG/2021/0017  Extant 
(Notified)  MACS 4028 (d)  Durum 
Wheat Agharkar Research 
Institute 
460 REG/2021/0018  Extant 
(Notified)  MACS 4058 (d)  Durum 
Wheat Agharkar Research 
Institute 
461 REG/2021/0020  Extant 
(Notified)  CO 17 (TCH 
1819) Tetraploid 
Cotton Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University  
462 REG/2021/0040 H  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Maize Hybrid 
57 (FH 3754)  Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
463 REG/2021/0040 
P1 Extant 
(Notified)  V 412 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
464 REG/2021/0040 
P2 Extant 
(Notified)  V 433 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
465 REG/2021/0042 H  Extant 
(Notified)  VL Sweet Corn 
Hybrid 2 (FSCH 
75) Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
466 REG/2021/0042 
P1 Extant 
(Notified)  VSL 26 Maize Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
467 REG/2021/0042 Extant VSL 27 Maize Indian Council of 
Annual Report 2021 -22 311 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 S. 
No. Registration  
 No. Type of 
Variety Denomination  Crop Applicant Name  
P2 (Notified)  Agricultural Research  
468 REG/2021/0043  Extant 
(Notified)  BGDS 1033  Tetraploid 
Cotton University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
469 REG/2021/0044  Extant 
(Notified)  GUJARAT URD 
2 Black gram  Junagadh Agricultural 
University  
470 REG/2021/0060  Extant 
(Notified)  PDKV Sardar 
(AKAW 4210 -6) Wheat Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh 
Krishi Vidyapeeth  
471 REG/2021/0067  Extant 
(Notified)  PKB 6 Cowpea University of Agricultural 
Sciences 
472 REG/2021/0068  Extant 
(Notified)  PDKV Blackgold 
(AKU 10-1) Black gram  Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh 
Krishi Vidyapeeth  
473 REG/2021/0073  Extant 
(Notified)  Pusa 1692 -10-20-
1-1-1 (IET 
26995) Rice Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute  
474 REG/2021/0076  Extant 
(Notified)  DBW 303 (Karan 
Vaishnavi)  Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
475 REG/2021/0077  Extant 
(Notified)  DDW 48 Durum 
Wheat Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research  
  
Annual Report 2021 -22 312 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 Annexure IX: Acronyms  
 
AICRP All India Coordinated Research Project  
BAU Birsa Agricultural University  
BMC Biodiversity Management Committee  
BCIL Biotech Consortium India Limited  
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
CARI Central Agricultural Research Institute  
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity  
CMD Chairmen -Cum-Managing Director  
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  
CHES Central Horticultural Experiment Station  
CSSRI Central Soil Salinity Research Institute  
DAC Department of Agriculture & Co -operation  
DUS Distinctiveness, Uniformity and Stability  
EVRC Extant Variety Recommendation Committee  
ETL Economic Threshold Level  
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade  
IARI Indian Agricultural Research Institute  
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
ICFRE Indian Council of Forest Research &  Education  
IINDUS Indian Information System as per DUS guidelines  
IPGRI International Plant Genetic Resource Institute (Bioversity Internationl)  
ITPGRFA  International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resource for Food and Agriculture  
KAU Kerala Agriculture University  
KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra  
NASC National Agricultural Science Center  
NGO Non-Governmental Organization   
Annual Report 2021 -22 313 
 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Authority 
 NORV Notified and Released Varieties of India  
NSAI National Seed Association of India  
NRCPB National Research Center on Plant Biotechnology  
NSRTC National Seed Research and Training Center  
MSEZ Mangalore Special Economic Zone Limited  
OECD Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development  
PS Principal Scientist  
PD Project Director  
PGR Plant Genetic Resources  
PPVFRA  Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’Rights Authority  
PVE Plant Variety Examiner  
PVIS Plant Variety Information System  
PVJ Plant Variety Journal of India  
R&D Research and Development  
RTI Right to Information  
SAO Senior Accounts Officer  
SAU State Agricultural Universities  
STO  Senior Technical Officer  
TRIPS Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights   
UPOV International Union of Protection of New Varieties of Plants  
VCK Variety Common Knowledge  
WTO World Trade Organization  
 
 
 
 
