ANNUAL
REPORT
* T T . ^ ) . 3 W . H ,  -  c R T T T T T  y W j l R l d t t  S T ^ f t T H ' T t T a i T T , T T ^ f
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology {ICAR-CIRCOT), Mumbai
Towards Ooubling Farmer's [nenme through SiustaiiisWc Processing Technology & Value Addition to by-produce

maim tmx&i.  of A araaiinjK A L fieseah ch
SARJMfJ PATEL OlfTSliWSMSa
to m  iNSnrmew m w t ®  2 0 1©
T^rfllKM  SnUttut* CM w m t
tfM fu 'te ic F H L  mittiite  a s R afe yH A i At oonea taw astfiin;
(O iB -fc fin F r« _  inStituti  tan h-Sh-ahs* O n  BCnS» 
TEEM HE LOOT, MUIfflAi SSf !XHI) nw rdtS SHUT PWSl  
CtraturdnJ.  &3A3 Inntatfcr jtww? O b it  hi tha a h p r  of  2nd h a tib A L  B tfM U K tif, f c  . | n w r i* r  hortui o ?  S S H  
worttng uiidM m e w a it u m  iswtfh  wEft
M n i& riM i Of f l*  *4l**rtH fc I t *  IIH dtut* i»
iM iih ln il t a u n jH it b a le  and A M b ^ e  w a r d i on  
p w H «i4 « *h n aiit9  m n tfu iw tta *. pa»#opiwimV'a*ja  
tM» > n fiA rti ft m m q m i i i —irm ritr m a n rrtnidibirTiiHiTiinirun?' wniUTmnii~ftT»ii  
■ iilH in d iA iIjM i^ M ifh liw In j im n n i t iiiballliiBTii 1^— riim iCiMtaiTtetaiUiUrtgBfflfr  
U n t i l  a b a M  h  IS M  n o tari a l i i  p n n lE  hufiM bivlh iv fc w itir g tfid  S o i m i  h 
o e tM ib riiiio iw  w iK m iiim w iB nm ^*iin6im tabiriitem inoiiinnci<B B 8B flftai» ■ ■ ■ m u  
Item Bw hW aitn-Cm  ^ lid b ^ W U  h  8000 B LC . apd now w tilr ^ i ■ OMua of ab td iM n a h n h i  
Ftat U n a U m  Pfct b r . h  BBS. Q fe B T lic  m w b ^ iH m ts iiliib iitin tilh a  ilm lE p n ii!  
oTftnfeli H«tgr, pfljmrtfcm o tgpton Ifiiw tfi 4 * « * "  rtih blvA^vailtnlton W*tm a
ranu fcj iMtuii a r s^h i h u n ^ 8h$ 3 ttiw iiin in ^in i p m a iis w in ta A H i iumohmi  
( l it M ^ l i e t n i A ^ b H I f e n H I h i i l i i i i u i t k l n i l i b l u j H j b i i l i n T n i i d i l  id b tito i.  
r t r Y n  i m li n m  1 1 1 1 1 1  m  T  r  m ta tn y  |wimi 1£  miiiiia i ill I  iw tiH ^ iw if r  a  m  TTftiir r r t a t iy  
n t»  M ttU U  m ntfste n w n iM  ftitm fi tm tnVjs  w m n w n i& ils s & s ? , m a n n ti e o n u m n w  sS fl ifm l m aul im iI | |iihm  taiiabiMitiimil niaiiaiulilBdinflnnrt»iindutnivitvifoai* 
Ajjrf-lualmm; Incibrtiint Oman tiw L n b M m ifc iH t and auiEftiabibniDEtqiib C A W  u nfcrtniB t 
iH lU fw ia fo p n H M p R isn M M m  u w n w h u M )m « « fV w in g|n i> ftatM fifiittw ,n aH * H flw M 0 i
« a  Id E H b  ■ H ip J q flm C a p p rtn d tls a i^ a llB tM n n n L tifb tiiti^ i n f f l l h  i’i "i ■  1 1■ >■ In ■ i■  1 1 1  rf a n t s w i hM  * 1 shiiMb h nMwIi^ dlttr a gam u p  Imuk Ubmia illui
pnMt*mgin£v*i!»4dAfon u humor* nth itimtn iHam.SM h^eni erwJwnfBtrt.

ICAR-CIRCOT
ANNUAL REPORT 2020
ISO 9001:2015
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology
Adenwala Road, Matunga (East), Mumbai-400 019  
(An ISO 9001:2015 Certified Institute and NABL Accredited Lab)
www.circot.res.in

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Published by :
Dr. Sujata Saxena, Director (Acting)
Compiled by :
Narayanan K 
Anand R Jadhav 
Hemangi R Pednekar
Edited by :
Dr. Sujata Saxena 
Dr. A. S. M. Raja 
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla 
Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy 
Shri G T V Prabu
ANNUAL
REPORT
2020
1  /  !{• f ‘ V
^TT^-ST^T. - c^sOm jiI eTiRic^  'MhfitT P ? T T T S rP T , $
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology (ICAR-CIRCOT), Mumbai
Towords Doubling Farmer's Income through Sustainable Processing Technology & Value Addition to by-produce
Printed at :  COLOURCOUNT,MUMBAI
©  ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology2021
ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020 is an in-house publication. Readers are not permitted to use or sell the 
data, photographs and figures presented in the report. This is a research work and other activities carried out in 
the Institute during the year 2020.
Citation :  ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020. ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
CONTENTS
Abbreviations
Preface i
Executive Summary iii
1. Introduction 1
2. Salient Research Achievements 6
3. Technology Management 35
4. Skill Development and Capacity Building 42
5. Linkages and Collaboration 48
6. Awards and Recognition 53
7. Publications 56
8. IMC, RAC and IRC meetings 63
9. Participation in Seminars / Conferences / 65
Meetings/ Workshops
10. Events Organised 71
11. Hindi Implementation 77
12. Distinguished Visitors 80
13. Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 81
14. Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav 85
15. Infrastructural Facilities 87
Annexures
I. List of On-Going Projects 89
II. Personnel 92
III. List of Committees 98
IV . Citizen Charter 103
V . Right to Information 104

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
ABBREVIATIONS
ABI Agri-Business Incubation
AFIS Advanced Fibre Information System
AFM Atomic Force Microscopy
AICRP All India Coordinated Research Project
AKMU Agricultural Knowledge Management Unit
ASRB Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials International
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards
BNPM Bank Note Paper Mill
DBSKKV Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth
CBPD Chemical & Biochemical Processing Division
CIRCOT Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology
CTRL Cotton Technological Research Laboratory
DR Gin Double Roller Gin
FTIR Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
GTC Ginning Training Centre
HDPS High Density Planting System
HVI High Volume Instrument
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICCC Indian Central Cotton Committee
ICT Institute of Chemical Technology
IFS Indian Fibre Society
IJSC Institute Joint Staff Council
IMC Institute Management Committee
IP Indian Pharmacopoeia
IRC Institute Research Council
ISAE Indian Society of Agricultural Engineers
ISCI Indian Society for Cotton Improvement
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ITMF International Textile Manufacturers Federation
ITMU Institute Technology Management Unit
MFC Micro Fibrillated Cellulose
MGMG Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
MPD Mechanical Processing Division
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration of Laboratories
NAIF National Agriculture Innovation Fund
NRCG National Research Centre for Grapes
PMC Project Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
QEID Quality Evaluation and Improvement Division
QRT Quinquennial Review Team
R&D Research and Development
RAC Research Advisory Committee
RAFTAAR Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied Sector Rejuvenation
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
RPM Revolutions per minute
SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy
SBEE Society of Benin Electrical Engineering
SNDT Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey (Women's University)
TAP Technical Assistance Programme
TTD Technology Transfer Division
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
VJTI Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
PREFACE
The cotton sector has been impacted by the COVID pandemic due to the 
demand destruction and supply chain disruptions. Despite the good crop 
of about 26.2 million tonnes, the global consumption has declined 
unprecedentedly to 22.7 million tonnes resulting in higher stocks and 
downward pressure on prices. The cotton spinning and textile 
manufacturing that were non-operational globally during lockdown in 
March-April 2020 revived faster with mills at Vietnam, Bangladesh and 
India reporting operations at about 75% of capacity by July 2020. 
The revival of the spinning sector has reversed the downward 
pressure on the cotton prices.
ICAR-CIRCOT made a significant contribution during pandemic to facilitate cotton procurement operation by 
organizing training programme on Grading and Procurement for agricultural officers of Maharashtra state. The 
institute catered to the cotton quality evaluation needs of the Government's procurement operation under 
MSP. The institute also published COVID advisories for the stakeholders in four languages to 
ensure safe revival of the sector.
The institute has adapted itself to the new way of functioning in on-line mode without any disruption in service 
to its stakeholders. The institute has been actively carrying out its mandated activities addressing the needs of 
the stakeholders in post-harvest processing of cotton, development of value added products, quality assistance 
to the country's cotton breeding programme and rendering commercial services including skill development, 
consultancy, incubation and testing.
ICAR-CIRCOT, marching on its path towards its centenary, has attained yet another milestone as an Institute of 
Excellence by bagging the prestigious Sardar Patel Outstanding ICAR Institute Award under the small institute 
category. The scientists also won awards and accolades for their attainments as a team and also in individual 
sphere of excellence. The institute has been very vibrant on the resource generation despite pandemic 
generating a revenue of Rs 305 lakhs during the year.
The incubation activity of the institute became vibrant with the award of RAFTAAR Agri-Business Incubation 
Centre (R-ABI) of DAC&FW with provision for seed stage and pre-seed stage funding for the innovative ideas 
incubated in the institute. The first Cohort of 14 ideas incubated in the R-ABI of the institute has received a total 
grant-in-Aid funding of Rs.1.44 crores. Two of the incubatees products viz., innovative lysimeter for on-farm 
management and cotton interlined sleeping bag for comfort were released during the ICAR foundation day on 
July 16,2020.
The contributions of all the scientific and technical staff towards the institute's achievements are duly 
acknowledged and their continued support to lead the institute towards global excellence is solicited.
Mumbai P. G. Patil
Director
i

ISO 9001:2015
II

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
ICAR-CIRCOT's dedicated scientific and technical 
workforce is always striving hard towards 
achieving sustainability & inclusive growth in the 
cotton sector. The Institute undertakes research 
activities in 5 major core areas viz.
I. Pre-ginning and Ginning;
ii. Mechanical processing: Technical textiles and 
Composites;
iii. Characterization - Cotton and other natural 
fibres, yarns and textiles;
iv. Chemical and Biochemical processing of 
cotton and its biom ass & by-product 
utilization;
v. Business incubation, Entrepreneurship and 
Human Resource Development.
The salient achievements made by the institute 
during 2020 are:
Research
Four p ro c e ss te c h n o lo g ie s  and seven  
machineries / value added products have been 
developed during 2020.
Process technologies
• Green process protocol for extraction of 
protein concentrates from cottonseed meal
• Hydrogen peroxide- N anosilver based 
disinfectant formulation
• Chemo-Mechanical Process for Production of 
Nano-Sulphur
• Process protocol to get bleached cotton 
linters with high Degree of Polymerization
Machineries / Value added products
• Rotary tubular drum dryer for quarantine of 
pink bollworm from cottonseed
• Marker fibre for the traceability of cotton 
textiles
• Development of Improved Kawdi Cotton 
Opener:• Cotton Interlined Sleeping Bags for Better 
Comfort
• Biodegradable wound dressing Pad with 
Antimicrobial Properties
• Heat Generating Smart Textiles Products
• Processed cotton linters for filter making 
applications
Publications
• Published 39 research papers in peer 
reviewed journals; 17 conference papers 
4 training manuals, 2 Book chapters and 16 
popular articles were published.
Skill Development initiative
• 12 training program m es including 11 
specialized (self-sponsored) trainings & 1  
Farmers training have been organized, 
benefitting 192 participants. Five of these 
special training programmmes on Cotton 
grading were sp ecially designed and 
conducted for the Agricultural Officers of 
Maharashtra state to help to procure the 
cotton lying unsold in farmers' fields due to 
Covid 19 lockdown.
• Revenue generated from training during 2020 
was '  16.94 lakhs.
Technology Management and Popularisation
• 11 consultancies were undertaken and 17 
M o U s w e re  s ig n e d  fo r  R e s e a r c h  
collaboration, technology commercialization 
and incubation.
• Organized / participated in 3 exhibitions, 2 
in d u stry -in te rfa c e  m eets as w ell as 
participated in various meetings, seminars, 
workshops and conferences for popularizing 
institute technologies among stakeholders.
• Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) activities 
were conducted in cotton growing villages in 
Wardha district of Maharashtra where
iii

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
s c ie n tists and te ch n ica l o ffice rs 
demonstrated farmer friendly technologies 
for enhancing farm income. In 2020, ICAR- 
CIRCOT conducted 2 webinars, 4 village visits, 
14 interface meetings, 4 demonstrations and 
awareness programs in which about 370 
fa rm e rs from  the ad o p te d  v illa g e s  
participated.
• One televisio n  talk on "Post-H arvest 
Technologies of Cotton" was delivered on DD 
Sahyadri .
Accreditation, Awards and Recognition
• Accredited with ISO 9001:2015 for Quality 
Management System by Bureau of Indian 
Standards.
• NABL accreditation for Mechanical and 
Chemical testing of cotton fibre, yarn and 
fabrics under ISO/ IEC 17025:2017.
• Sardar Patel Outstanding ICAR institute 
Award 2019 in the small institute category
• Jawaharlal Nehru Award for P.G. Outstanding 
Doctoral Thesis Research in Agricultural and 
Allied Sciences 2019 in the category of 
A gricu ltu ral Engineering aw arded to 
Dr.Ashok Kumar Bharimalla, Senior Scientist 
of the institute.
Commercial Services
• ICAR-CIRCOT continued as Approved Assayer 
with Indian Clearing Corporation Ltd. and 
Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd.
• During 2020, a total of 42,722 samples were 
tested at Mumbai headquarters, GTC Nagpur 
and other regional units generating a total 
revenue of '  2 ,7 5 ,8 0 ,7 0 3 / - thro u gh  
commercial testing.
• ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cotton(an import 
substitute for USDA standards for calibrating 
textile testing equipment) - 148 containers 
sold to stakeholders generating revenue of 
'  1,39,860/- during the year 2020.
iv• ABI centre at ICAR-CIRCOT: Two incubatees 
graduated and three new incubatees are 
admitted during 2020 for developing new 
enterprises in 'Development of starch based 
film for packaging', 'Development of Paddy 
straw based particle boards' and 'Preparation 
of bio-degradable products using agro 
biomass (banana fibre, rice straw, bagasse)'.
• RAFTAAR - Agri Business Incubation Centre 
(R-ABI) of RKVY by the Department of 
Agricultural Cooperation and Farmers 
welfare has started functioning at ICAR- 
CIRCOT. Five applicants for pre-seed stage 
funding and ten applicants for Seed stage 
funding are incubated in 1s t  Cohort.
Financial Management
• All transactions in the Institute are 100% 
digital and cashless.
• The Institute ensured complete utilization 
(100%) of the sanctioned budget allocation 
during 2019-20 and 86.73% during 2020-21 
(up to 31 December 2020).
• The revenue generation was '  305.93 lakhs 
during the year 2020.
Other activities
• Cleanliness programmes under Swachh  
Bharat Abhiyaan  in the Institute premises 
and at the staff quarters were regularly 
conducted throughout the year with active 
participation of the staff.
• Covid 19 Advisories published in four 
languages for the stakeholders

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
1. Introduction
ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai was inaugurated on 
03r d  December 1924 by the then viceroy & 
Governor-General of India as the Technological 
Laboratory under the then Indian Central Cotton 
Committee (ICCC). In 1966, The ICAR took the 
administrative control of the Institute and later in 
1991, it was renamed as the Central Institute for 
Research on Cotton Technology. Over the past 
nine decades the institute has made a substantial 
contribution to the stakeholders of the cotton and 
allied sectors.
The institute has it's headquarter at Mumbai and 
is working under Agricultural Division of ICAR. The 
vision of the institute is "Global Excellence in  
Cotton Technology"  and the in stitu te is 
functioning with the following mandates:
1. Basic and Strategic Research on Processing 
Cotton and its Agro-Residues, Development 
of Value Added Products and Q uality 
Assessment
2. Skill Development and Business Incubation 
Services and Function as Referral Laboratory 
for Cotton Fibres
There are four research divisions namely, Quality 
Evaluation and Improvement Division (QEID), 
Mechanical Processing Division (MPD), Chemical 
& Biochemical Processing Division (CBPD) and 
Technology Transfer Division (TTD) in the institute 
to fa cilita te  and m onitor the Research, 
Consultancy, Training, Testing, Technology 
Transfer, Incubation and supporting the start-ups. 
The institute has six regional units namely Ginning 
Training Centre at Nagpur and Regional Quality 
Evaluation Units situated at Coimbatore, Sirsa, 
Surat, Guntur and Dharwad.
The Director is heading the Institute assisted 
by the heads of four research divisions,administration and finance & accounts sections. 
The Priority-setting, Monitoring and Evaluation 
(PME) Cell assists the Director in assessing the 
performance of various research projects, 
handling communications with the council etc.
The Research Advisory Committee (RAC) guides 
the Director in stream lining the research 
programmes of the institute. The research 
programmes are carried out under the following 
five broad core areas:
i. Pre-ginning and ginning
ii. Mechanical processing: Technical textiles and 
Composites
iii. Characterization: Cotton and other natural 
fibres, yarns and textiles
iv. Chemical and biochemical processing and 
Biomass & by-product utilization
v. Entrepreneurship and Human Resource 
Development
The contribution of the Institute to the progress 
of post-harvest processing of cotton and value 
addition to cotton by-produce over the past nine 
and half decades of its existence is phenomenal. 
The institute is one of its kind in the World to carry 
out research solely on Cotton technology. The 
institute has also played a pivotal role under the 
Technology M ission on Cotton (TM C) in 
Modernization of the Ginning Industry in the 
country. The significant contributions in the area 
of ginning machinery research have helped the 
country to be self-reliant and also become net 
exporter of ginning machinery. The Ginning 
machinery is now being exported to the Afro- 
Asian countries earning precious foreign 
exchange for the country.
1

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Organogram of ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai
2

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
The Institute has an important role as the 
Techn o lo gy partner under the All India 
Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Cotton 
for developing and screening quality cotton 
genotypes. Lauding its efforts, the status of the 
Institute has been designated as Principal 
Investigator for Quality Research in the project. 
ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cotton, an indigenously 
developed Standard Reference Material, is an 
import substitute for the USDA reference material 
used for calibrating fibre testing instruments such 
as High Volume Instrument (HVI).
ICAR-CIRCOT is also supporting the private sector 
in its R&D efforts for development of machineries 
in the post-harvest processing of cotton and value 
addition to agro-biomass. The institute has 
successfully commercialised new machines and 
products developed in the institute, some of 
them worth mentioning are on-board pre-cleaner 
for cotton stripper, saw band pre-cleaner for 
m echanically picked cotton, stick removal 
machine for mechanically picked cotton, double 
roller gin with self-grooving rubber roller, 
miniature spinning system and village level sliver 
making machine, cotton lint opener, rubber 
composites for flexi check dam etc. Many process 
technologies for the value addition of cotton 
fibres and cotton biomass are also developed and 
demonstrated by the Institute. The Green 
Crematorium using cotton stalk briquettes and 
continuously feeding pellets stove developed by 
the institute are commercialised.
Recently, the Institute has been carrying out 
research in diverse areas and developed products 
and processes like cotton rich blended fabrics for 
sportswear, application of cotton in technical 
textiles especially medical textiles, mosquito 
repellent finishing for textile materials, solvent 
extraction process for gossypol removal in 
cottonseed meal for use as non-ruminant feed, 
salt free dyeing technology, value added products 
from Banana pseudo stem fibres and Naturally 
coloured cotton based products. The institute hascontributed towards making the chemical 
processing and finishing of cotton textiles eco­
friendly. In this context lot of work has been 
carried out on extraction and application of 
natural dyes to cotton textiles and the institute is 
actively participating in formulation of BIS and ISO 
standards for identification of natural dyes. Scale 
up trials for salt free dyeing of cotton with 
reactive dyes developed by the institute were 
successfully undertaken in an industry and MoU 
has been signed for its industrial trials with 
Industry Association at Tirupur (T.N.).
The institute has done a pioneering work in the 
area of nanotechnology and its application in 
textiles & composites. The processes to impart 
various functional finishes to cotton textiles such 
as anti-microbial, UV protective, water repellent 
using nanomaterials have been developed by the 
Institute. A Nanocellulose Pilot Plant facility, first 
of its kind in the World to produce nanocellulose 
from cotton, was established in the year 2015, 
based on the indigenous chemo-mechanical 
process. Applications of nanocellulose in cement 
concrete, rubber composite, pulp and paper to 
enhance functional properties and in paint 
formulation as a rheology modifier have also 
been carried out. The development of security 
grade paper from a blend of cotton and natural 
fibre pulp and imparting security feature have 
also been demonstrated by the Institute. In this 
year, nano-ZnO production technology for 
fertilizer application was commercialized to M/s. 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers, Mumbai.
ICAR-CIRCOT is the Lead institute and the Nodal 
Centre for implementing the Consortia Research 
Platform (CRP) on Natural Fibres. The project this 
year was implemented in collaboration with ICAR- 
NINFET, Kolkata, and ICAR-CSWRI, Avikanagar.
The Institute has been offering innovative tailor 
made skill development programmes at national 
and international level in a host of subjects that 
were not offered before. The institute also offers 
farmers training programme on post-harvest
3

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
processing and value addition to cotton by­
produce, Increase in farm income through 
increase in production and processing at Village 
level.
The institute also caters to the capacity building 
needs of the cotton sector in the African 
countries. Under the Cotton Technical Assistance 
Programme (Cotton TAP) for Africa, the institute 
has contributed towards capacity building of the 
stakeholders in seven African countries viz., 
Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Malawi, Nigeria 
and Uganda. ICAR-CIRCOT was also instrumental 
in establishing a Regional Knowledge Cluster cum 
Training Centre for Post-harvest and Ginning 
Technologies at Bohicon, Benin. The institute also 
caters to skill building of the African Stakeholders 
as per Indo-African Forum Summit. Recently 
ICAR-CIRCOT has assisted the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 
in implementing a UN Development account 
Project 1617K on "Promoting Cotton by-products 
in Eastern and Southern Africa" in Zambia, 
Zimbabwe, Tanzania and Uganda.
The Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) Centre of the 
institute is promoting and nurturing the new 
enterprise based on the technologies of post­
harvest processing and value addition to cotton 
and other natural fibre biomass In line with the 
Government programme of Start-Up India.
CIRCOT RKVY RAFTAAR Agri Business Incubator 
(CIRCOT-R-ABI) was sanctioned by RKVY Division, 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India in January 2019. 
This incubator is providing funding support as 
g ra n t-in -aid  to agrip re n e u rs in product 
development, commercialization and scaling up.
Coherent with the government initiative for 
doubling farmers' income, the Institute has taken 
up many innovative projects. Value addition to 
cotton biomass through preparation of compostfrom  cotton biom ass, p o p u larisatio n  of 
mushroom cultivation using cotton biomass and 
preparation of briquettes and pellets from cotton 
stalks as a source of renewable energy are some 
of the activities taken up for creating economic 
value for the cotton stalks and enhancing the farm 
income.
The track record of ICAR-CIRCOT is very good in 
meeting the revenue generation target provided 
by the Council through its Internal Resource 
Generation. The institute generated revenue 
through Techn o lo gy C o m m e rcia lizatio n , 
Technology Incubation Service, Consultancy and 
Commercial testing services besides sale of the 
products developed based on In stitu te  
technologies. ICAR-CIRCOT makes every effort to 
ensure 100 % utilization of the allocated Funds.
ICAR-CIRCOT is one of the most recognised 
laboratories for testing of cotton fibres, yarn and 
textiles made of cotton and cotton blends with 
other fibres. It provides commercial services for 
the stakeholders in the cotton value chain. Many 
testing facilities in the institute are accredited 
w ith  ISO 1 7 0 2 5 :2 0 0 5  by the N a tio n a l 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration of 
Laboratories (NABL) since 1999. The Institute is 
also accredited with ISO 9001:2015 for Quality 
Management System by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS).
The staff position of the institute as on 31-12­
2020 is given in Table 1.1. The institute is 
running with 56% of strength in Scientific and 
Technical category.
Table 1.1 Staff Position as on 31.12.2020
C atego ry San ctio n edIn­
PositionVacant
Scientific 48 28 20
Technical 112 62 50
Administrative 47 29 18
Supporting 57 33 24
T o ta l 264 152 112
4

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Table 1.2 Funds utilization during FY 2019-20
H ead  o f  
E x p e n d itu reIC A R -C IR C O T  (including SCSP) C R P  on N a tu ra l F ib re s
Allocation Expenditure%
utilizationAllocation Expenditure%
utilization
Grant-in-Aid-
Capital201.51 201.48 100 % 31.50 31.50 100 %
Grant-in-Aid-
Salaries1859.99 1859.99 100 % -- -- --
Grant- 
in-Aid - 
GeneralPension
only138.84 138.84 100 % -- -- --
Other
than
Pension609.75 609.71 100 % 58.50 58.46 99.93 %
Total 2 8 1 0 .0 9 2 8 1 0 .0 2 100 % 9 0 .0 0 8 9 .9 6 9 9 .9 6  %
Table 1.3 Funds Utilisation during the Year 2020 f  Lakhs
Head of Expenditure ICAR-CIRCOT
(including SCSP)CRP on Natural Fibres
Allocation
(2020-21)Expenditure  
(Apr -  Dec  
2020)Allocation
(2020-21)Expenditure  
(Apr -  Dec 2020)
Grant-in-Aid- Capital 235.00 10.19 45.00 1.20
Grant-in-Aic - Salaries 1960.62 1518.90 -- --
Grant-in­
Aid-
GeneralPension only 600.00 208.98 -- --
Other than 
Pension570.00 322.38 82.00 26.20
Total 3365.622060.45
(87.57% of 
released funds)127.0027.40
(50.32% of 
released funds)
Funds released 2352.81 54.45
Revenue Generation
in-C
_ r o
» ! /
o ;3
£o ;>o ;cc250
200>
150
100
5037
01224
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
April - Dec. 2020
I Testing ■  Training ■ Consultancy ■  Other ■  Total
5

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2. Salient Research Achievements
2.1 CORE AREA - I: PRE-GINNING AND GINNING
2.1.1 ICAR-CIRCOT Kawadi Cotton Opener
ICAR-CIRCOT Kawadi Cotton Opener is being 
designed and developed for processing of kawadi 
cotton, the immature and infested seed-cotton 
separated aside in the pre-cleaning systems in 
cotton ginneries. For its closely held short fibres, 
kawadi cotton is not ginnable on a double roller 
(DR) gin and is generally ignored by ginners 
considering it as a waste material. However, it can 
be processed and good quality lint can be 
recovered from it. About 5-10% of seed cotton is 
separated as kawadi cotton by Indian ginneries 
i.e. about 10-20 lakh tonnes of seed cotton every 
year. About 40% of this i.e. 4-8 lakh tonnes of seed 
cotton can be recovered for obtaining the usable 
lint, thus minimising losses incurred by ginneries 
on account of unprocessed kawadi cotton.
The Auto CAD drawings of the new design have 
been prepared for fabrication, testing and 
necessary refinement to develop an efficient 
system for processing of kawadi cotton in 
ginneries. The new machine is expected to havethe capacity for processing of 6-8 Q/h of raw 
kawadi cotton. The final Lint Recovery shall be 
around 22-25%.
2.1.2 Development of a Rotary Tubular Drum Dryer for Quarantine of Pink  
Bollworm infested Cottonseeds in Ginneries
A continuous processing type Rotary Tubular 
Drum Dryer (RTDD) of 1 tonne/h capacity was 
developed and commissioned at GTC, Nagpur for 
quarantine of Pink Bollworm (PBW) infested 
cottonseeds.
In this system, cottonseed is quarantined by 
indirectly heating it to about 65-700 C for 5-6 min 
using thermic fluid as heating medium. The inlet 
temperature of thermic fluid can be safely 
increased to 200 0 C temperature by controllingthe boiler fuel feeding. The similar protocol is also 
followed for quarantine of cottonseeds by 
ginneries of US and Egypt. In the developed dryer, 
wet cottonseed is introduced into the upper end 
of the dryer shell and the fed cottonseed 
progresses through it by virtue of rotation of 
tubing system and dried cottonseed is withdrawn 
at the lower end of the dryer.
The major assemblies of the developed RTDD are 
described briefly as follows:
6

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
1. Bucket elevator: It is developed for lifting of 
about 2 tonnes/h cottonseed vertically to 
about 2500 mm height and feeding the same 
to the dryer inlet using a 2 HP electric motor. 
There are specially designed metallic cups 
attached over a vertical belt conveyor for 
lifting and feeding of cottonseed. A variable 
frequency drive (VFD) is provided to control 
the feeding rate.
2. Rotary Joint: It is one of the most critical 
component of indirect heating dryers. It is 
meant for supply of hot and cold thermic fluid 
to the dryer. In the developed system, a 
rotary joint having 75 mm and 90 mm 
diameter is selected for supply of hot and 
cold fluids, respectively into and out of the 
dryer.
3. Elliptical Shell: It is used for housing of metal 
tubes, which are installed longitudinally in its 
interior. The outer portion of the shell is 
insulated using glass wool. The height, 
diameter and length of the shell are 1042, 
600 and 2500 mm, respectively. Two heat 
resistant bearings are mounted at either side 
of the shell for mounting of the tubing 
system.
4. Tubing System: A bunch of well-designed 
metal tubes are used for transportation of 
hot and cold thermic fluids into the dryer. It 
consists of a main annulus central tube of 127 
mm internal diameter and 7.6 mm thickness. 
It is mounted inside and at the centre of the 
elliptical shell over bearings. The hot fluid 
flows through the outer portion while the 
cold fluid flows through the inner portion of 
the central annulus tube. The central tubedistributes the hot fluid to a bunch of 20 pipes 
(5 tubes each are fitted longitudinally in 4 
rows over the main pipe) having 50.8 mm 
internal diameter and 5 mm thickness 
through the 4 manifold pipes. The hot fluid 
circulated in these pipes supplies heat to 
cottonseeds and leaves the dryer through 
rotary joint via annulus space of the main 
central pipe. The whole tubing system is 
rotated using a VFD controlled 5 HP motor.
5. Flights and Lifters: The wet cottonseed, 
which is fed into the dryer, is lifted and 
pushed inside the dryer drum through the 
flights and shovels, respectively. The pitch 
and shape of the flights and shovels influence 
the amount of material present in the rotary 
dryer. Flights and lifters are designed 
considering that the volume occupied by the 
load of solids in the rotary dryer shall be 
between 10 and 15% of the total dryer 
volume. The flights of the rotary drum dryer 
used in the present work are of the two- 
segment type.
6. Moisture Transportation System :  It is
designed and developed for removal of 
moisture evaporated during heating from the 
dryer. It consists of a centrifugal fan and a 
2D2D cyclone having 600 mm barrel 
diameter. An air damper has been provided at 
the fan inlet to control the air flow rate of the 
moisture transportation system.
7. Cottonseed Conveying and Bagging System:
A belt conveyor system has been designed 
and developed for transportation and 
bagging of the dried seed.
7

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Performance Evaluation :  The developed dryer 
was evaluated for its performance at GTC, Nagpur 
during the reported period. The incoming thermic 
fluid temperature, initial cotton seed moisture 
content and tube rotational speeds were varied to 
180-200°C, 12-18%, 6-10 RPM, respectively. The 
recorded room tem perature and relative 
humidity were in the range of 25-28°C and 
35-40%.
Initially, it was observed that cottonseed 
transportation rate was very high even at 8-1° 
RPM leading to withdrawal of cottonseed from 
the dryer in less than a minute resulting into rising 
of cottonseed temperature and removal of 
cottonseed moisture content by merely 1°-2°°C 
and 0.5-1%. When the rotational speed was 
reduced to 2 RPM, it was found that cottonseed 
was moving in lumps and it was neither mixing 
and nor coming into contact of all peripheral 
tubes leading to insufficient heating of seeds 
resulting in poor moisture removal. It was learnt 
that a minimum rotational speed of tubes is 
required for proper mixing of seeds for increasing 
its temperature and reducing moisture content.
In order to address this issue, the cottonseed 
shovels and lifters were modified to reduce the 
cottonseed transportation rate; the pitch of the
2.1.3 Digital Ginning Percentage Indicator
Ginning percentage (GP) is an im portant 
parameter in objective grading of seed cotton and 
has significant impact on profitability of both 
farmers and ginners. Traditionally seed cotton is 
traded irrespective of GP which is a major price 
deciding component. This traditional practice is 
depriving farmers from getting additional benefitlifters and flights was reduced to 10° mm from 
initial pitch of 500 mm resulting into proper 
mixing of cottonseeds at about 6-8 RPM. The 
fresh trials were conducted to assess the drying 
performance of the modified dryer. Initially, trials 
were conducted by varying the incoming thermic 
fluid temperature in the range of 180-2000 C, but 
the final cottonseed temperature was less than 
600 C for temperature below 2000 C. Hence, the 
full-scale trials were conducted by keeping 
incoming thermic fluid temperature at 2000 C. 
The gauge pressures of incoming and outgoing 
thermic fluid were measured as 1 bar and 0.5 bar, 
respectively, which shows that there was about 
0.5 bar pressure drop in the dryer.
The developed dryer was able to reduce moisture 
content of the cottonseed by 6% moisture 
content and increase its temperature over and 
above 65-680 C (initial temp. 260 C), which were 
sufficient enough to properly quarantine 
co tto n se ed  ag ain st PBW. How ever, the 
effectiveness of the dryer was not up to the mark 
for quarantine of cottonseed having 18% 
m o i stu re co n te n t a s th e m a xi m u m fi n  a l  
cottonseed temperature achieved was lesser 
than required for quarantine purpose.
(DGPI) for Portable Cotton Gins
for sowing improved GP cotton cultivars. 
Presently the benefits for growing high GP cotton 
normally goes to the cotton processors.
Portable gins are being used by cotton breeders, 
traders and seed industries for determination of 
GP. However these machines are not used to their 
fullest extent as after ginning of seed cotton, the
8

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
lint and cottonseed are to be weighed separately 
on weighing balance and then calculate the 
ginning percentage manually which requires 
additional time, labour and accuracy also gets 
adversely affected. Absence of appropriate 
machine to instantly and accurately determine GP 
at market yards/ginneries resulted in continued 
adoption of visual grading of seed cotton. Hence 
need was felt to modify portable gin for quick and 
accurate determination of GP.
Therefore a Digital Ginning Percentage Indicator 
(DGPI) for portable cotton gin is designed and 
being developed on electrometrical principle for 
real time determination of ginning percentage of 
seed cotton. The major components of DGPI are 
weight recording system, GOC-PLC setup, 
software programme, electronic display unit and 
accessories for integration with the portable 
cotton gin.
1. Weight recording System :  DGPI consists of 
three load cells with weight transmitters for 
weighing seed cotton (minimum capacity 200 
gm), cottonseed (minimum capacity 200 gm) 
and lint (minimum capacity 100 gm) with 
accuracy of 0.1 gm. Load cells are to be fixed 
with suitable fixtures at respective locations 
on portable gins.
2. GOC-PLC setup :  The Graphic Operation 
C o n tro lle r (GOC) PLC setup is being 
developed with GOC-35-DI/DO, Ethernet 
module and RS 485 module. Inbuilt HMI is 
provided in GOC-35 PLC. All load cells are to 
be connected to a PCC-HMI panel.3. Software program :  A software program is 
being developed to determine GP from 
recorded weights. Load cells transfer weight 
data to PLC through transmission unit. PLC 
records, stores, analyses and retrieves data. 
Provision for recording weight of seed cotton, 
cottonseeds and lint is made in the PLC along 
with sample number. The data can be stored 
in a Micro SD Card which can be removed 
from PLC to upload the records to a PC.
4. Electronic display :  Electronic display unit 
along with electrical control panel with 
equivalent accessories is developed for 
displaying the ginning percentage on real 
time basis digitally in percentage terms.
5. Integration of DGPI with portable cotton gin :
Developed DGPI will be integrated with 
portable cotton gin with fixtures, conducting 
and cabling.
The digital GP indicator on portable cotton gins is 
expected to aid in increased usage of portable 
gins as it will record GP on real time basis. It is 
further expected to accelerate in GP based 
trading of seed cotton in ginning industries and 
market yards. It would help farmers, traders and 
ginners to realize the better value for their 
product. Further the traditional practice of cotton 
trading w ithout determ ining GP which is 
depriving farmers from getting additional benefit 
for sowing improved GP cotton cultivars will be 
eliminated. The developmental DGPI would 
empower farmers with premium rates for their 
cotton over and above 34% GP.
9

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.1.4 Optimization of groove profile and diameter of chrome leather roller for  
enhancing the performance of double roller gin
The harvested seed cotton contains both lint 
(fiber) and non-lint part of the cotton plant. 
Ginning is the first important operation on seed 
cotton under which the seeds are separated from 
lint and the machine used for it is called a gin. 
Mostly double roller gins (DR gins), are used for 
commercial ginning in India. The lint quality and 
ginning efficiency depend upon many factors 
such as variety, staple length and moisture 
content of the seed cotton, speed, diameter, 
length and material of the roller, speed of rotating 
knife, etc. The peculiar gripping action of cotton 
fibers to roller covering surface is a crucial factor 
in the successful ginning. Therefore, grooving 
profiles of chrome leather roller of DR gin is 
important factor to investigate which could 
adversely affect the overall plant capacity andmay affect lint quality. Three private ginning 
industries from the vicinity of Nagpur viz. Sultania 
Oil Industries and Pressing Unit Pvt. Ltd. (Plant-A), 
P . N. Gavande Ginning Pressing & Oil Mill Pvt. Ltd., 
(Plant-B) and Prakash White Gold Ginning & 
Pressing Pvt. Ltd, (Plant-C) have been visited to 
study the chrome leather roller grooving profiles 
adopted by these industries. The data was 
recorded in terms of roller length, diameter, 
groove spacing, width, and depth, number of 
grooves, plant capacity and ginning percentage 
(GP). Ten numbers of random ginning stands 
consist of twenty chrome leather rollers were 
selected from each plant for the study. The 
observations recorded during the investigation 
are summarized in the following table.
Investigated Parameters Industry "A" Industry "B" Industry "C"
No of stands and gin 
type48 Stands
Golden Jubilee DR Gin24 Stands Jumbo 
DR Gin24 Stands Golden 
Jubilee DR Gin
Number of grooves 15-18 11-15 12-16
Groove spacing (mm) 14.90-53.33 21.05-57.72 16.27-39.36
Groove width (mm) 1.02-4.89 0.43-3.80 0.89-5.84
Groove depth (mm) 1.11-4.00 1.14-3.55 1.09-3.45
Capacity (bales/12 hrs) 180 120 120
Ginning percentage 35-37% 35% 32%
It was found that, all the plants perform roller 
grooving weekly or twice in a week depending on 
moisture content of seed cotton. These ginneries 
perform manual grooving using marble cutter. It 
takes around 4-7 minutes to form grooves on one 
roller using one operator. The spacing, width and 
depth of the groove and number of grooves of 
each of the roller should be constant and uniform 
in ideal conditions but a lot of variations were 
observed in the groove profiles as well as in
10number of grooves of visited ginning industries. 
Damaged, incomplete and extended grooves 
were also observed during the study. The main 
reasons behind this variation could be manual 
operation of groove formation and replacement 
of operator on season basis. Lack of technical 
knowledge, negligence in operation by fitter and 
hurry in the job to be done at earliest could also 
be some of the reasons for non-uniform groove 
profile.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.2 CORE AREA - II: MECHANICAL PROCESSING, TECHNICAL TEXTILES  
AND COMPOSITES
2.2.1 Evaluation of spinnability and formulation of guidelines for spinning of  
recycled fibre from fabric waste and develop value added products
The recycled fibres collected from Industry 
were extracted from pre-consumer waste cotton 
knitted fabrics. These waste fabrics contain 
mixture of single colour dyed fabrics with 
different fabric structures such as single jersey, 
interlock, purl etc. The process of fibre extraction 
is mechanical action such as cutting, shredding of 
fabrics and opening fibre. The recycled fibre looks 
majority of short fibre and in opened manner. 
The trash analysis of recycled cotton fibre 
carried out by CIRCOT SP-4 method showed the 
percentage of lint, Trash and invisible loss to be 
97.85%, 0.67% and 1.48% respectively. The 
physical properties of recycled cotton fibres was
Recycled Cotton Fibre
Since recycled cotton fibres were short fibres it 
was very difficult to spin 100% recycled fibre 
alone. It required minimum 10% of long fibres 
for transportation or holding the short fibres 
during its transfer between the rollers and yarn 
forming time. So, the recycled fibre based yarnanalysed by High Volume Instrument (HVI) 
(ASTM D-5867:1995), the UHML and ML were 
18.6m m  and 12.8m m  re sp e ctiv e ly. The 
identification of fibres as analysed by IS 3416: 
1988, showed that the recycled fibres consist of 
99.1% cellulose fibre. In order to observe the 
surface morphology of the virgin and recycled 
cotton fibre, scanning electron microscopic 
analysis was employed. From the Figure some of 
the recycled fibres were found to be broken, 
some were seen to be fibrillated by mechanical 
actions such as cutting, shredding and opening 
action of fabric waste. Figure below shows the 
morphological analysis of virgin cotton fibre.
Virgin Cotton Fibre
was produced from recycled cotton fibre (RF) with 
blending of virgin cotton (VC) fibre in different 
blend p ro p o rtio n s such as 5 0R F/50 V C , 
65RF/35VC, 80RF/20VC, 90RF/10VC and 
100%VC through microspinning techniques.
11

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Recycled cotton fibre Sliver Recycled cotton fibre based yarn
The sample weight of 100g was taken for all the 
blend ratios and the lap formation was done on 
the in d igen o usly developed CIRCOT Lap 
preparation machine. The lap was fed to the 
carding machine and formed sliver. During the 
carding process the fibre loss was around 20 to 30 
percent. The whole sliver weight was taken 
carefully and the sliver length was taken with thehelp of the wrapping drum and then carding sliver 
hank was calculated. The whole sliver is cut into 6 
equal parts with the help of a wrapping block and 
the 6 ends were fed to the miniature drawing 
machine to get the uniform parallel fibre sliver. 
Further, this sliver fed into miniature rotor 
spinning machine for yarn formation.
2.2.3 Development of cellulosic nanofibre based micronutrient delivery system  
for urban farming
Development of multi-feed High-pressure  
electrospinning nozzle
During this reporting period different gauge and 
length multi-feed high pressure nozzle was 
designed and fabricated (Fig.1a) which can help to 
feed the p o lym e r and co m p re sse d  air 
simultaneously. Nanoparticle mixed nanofibre 
generation is facing difficulties in solving needle 
blocking and uneven distribution of the particle 
into nanofibre. Hence high-pressure multi-feed 
electrospinning nozzle was designed with an 
objective to remove the clogged particle 
continuously by applying compressed air and 
polymer solution simultaneously in the singlenozzle output. It consists of two independent 
feeding arrangement and one delivery nozzle 
arrangement, therefore at the same time 
p o lym e r and co m p re sse d  air can feed 
simultaneously in the same delivery path. Thus 
the developed system will prevent the needle 
blocking and positively clean the nozzle 
frequently. Further, it can be used for higher 
production. Three different gauge (14, 18, 20) 
needles were fabricated as shown in Fig. 1b, 
further trial needs to be conducted to optimize 
the nanofibre production and fibre diameter by 
using different needle gauge with different 
applied pressure.
12

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Fig: 1a Multi-feed electrospinning needle 
arrangements
Fig 1b. Different Gauge multi-feed needle 
arrangement
Development of Electrospun Nanofibre based  
micronutrient delivery system for agriculture  
crop
Nano zinc-oxide encapsulated biodegradable PVA 
electrospun mat was produced by using multi­
phase electrospinning machine. A 10 % Polyvinyl 
alcohol (PVA) (Mol. Weight 70,000 - 100,000 
g/mol) was used to produce nanofibers and 10% 
zinc oxide nanoparticles with an average size of 
124 ± 10 nm were used for encapsulation. The 
process parameters were optimized to produce 
finer and even fibres; flow rate 1.0 ml/hr, voltage 
30 kV distance 15 cm and traverse speed was 2 
mm/sec. The produced zinc oxide particle 
encapsulated nanofibre particle distribution wasanalysed through fluorescence microscopy as 
shown in Fig.2 the particle distribution was found 
good. Further characterization process is under 
progress. The fibre diameter was analysed 
through SEM analysis (Fig. 3). The average fibre 
diameter measurement considered in the range 
of 180-200 nm. Further bulk production trials 
need to be conducted for pot culture analysis.
Fig 2. Zinc oxide nanoparticle distribution 
in the PVA electrospun mat
Fig: 3 SEM image of PVA electrospun mat 
produced through multi-phase 
electrospinning machine.
2.3 CORE AREA - III: CHARACTERISATION -  COTTON AND OTHER  
NATURAL FIBRES, YARNS AND TEXTILES
2.3.1 All India Coordinated Research project on Cotton (Quality Research)
Quality parameter data was generated on the pertaining to the ICAR-AICRP °n Cotton Zonal
cotton samples received from the cotton Trials (North Zone Central Zone and South Zone)
breeders throughout the country from breeders and National Trials.  | n  a^  the technological data
13

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
on 3764 samples have been reported of which 
1457 samples belong to National trials while 1114 
cotton samples correspond to Zonal Trials. Out of 
the zonal trials, 154 cotton samples belong to 
North zone, 535cotton samples belong to Central 
zone and 425 belong to South zone. Under ICAR- 
Bt Trials 1147 samples were received and 
analysed for fibre quality parameters. Under 
Agronomy trial 46 samples were received for 
spinning performance along with fibre quality 
assessment. The quality parameters of all cotton 
fiber samples were measured by using the HighVolume Instrument operated in the HVI Mode. 
The data was analysed and reported.
T ria l N am e N o. o f Sa m p le s
National Trials 1457
North Zone 154
Central Zone 535
South Zone 425
Agronom y Trials 46
ICAR-Bt Trial 1147
T o ta l 3 7 6 4
Br06b -compact genotypes under irrigated condition  
Observations
V The samples were having UI equal to the minimum requirement
The tenacity of the samples was either at 
par or marginally low compared to the 
minimum requirement.
The micronaire values of all the samples 
were higher than the maximum requiredmicronaire as depicted above.
Entry RAHC 1902(31.0 mm UHML,  
Tenacity 30.0 g/tex, Mic 4.2, Uniformity  
Index 85), has performed well.
14

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Br15a - PHT Inter specific -  Hybrid (hir x barb)
Entry DHB 1901 (37.1 mm UHML, Tenacity 33.8 g/tex,  
Mic 3.4, Uniformity Index 85) has performed well.
Br22a/b - G.Arboreum
Entry PA 863 (28.4 mm UHML, Tenacity 27.8  
g/tex, Mic 5.0, Uniformity Index 82), has  
performed well.
Salient findings
V The CVIC meeting was held on during 
the month of May and June 2020 and124 proposals were screened 
G.barbadence  variety trial resulted fibre 
with good strength, micronaire and 
uniformity
Strength up to 42 gpt was observed 
Compact genotypes trial under irrigated
15

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
conditions performed well in terms of 
strength and micronaire 
In G.hirsutum  trial under rainfed 
conditions the strength was marginally 
lower than the minimum requirementV Long linted G. arboreum  trial resulted 
with good fibre length and micronaire. 
Micronaire of all trials was observed in higher 
side than last year
2.3.2 Marker Fibres: A Tool for Traceability of Cotton Textiles
The chemical identified for producing marker 
fibres is highly spectral active. To determine the 
sensitivity of marker chemical on Raman analysis 
it was attempted to carry out the application of 
marker chemical by using printing experiments 
Marker chemical was added with water based 
thickening system and applied on cotton fabric 
using table screen printing process.
It was found out that 1 % (OWP) of marker 
chemical gives detectable peak in Raman analysis.The presence of marker chemical was also 
confirmed by FTIR analysis. It was attempted to in 
situ synthesize the tracer chemical on cotton 
fibre.
The bleached cotton fibre was treated with 
precursor chemical using precipitation reaction. 
Then the treated fibre was evaluated using 
Raman analysis. It was found out that peak for 
tracer chemical was appearing in the spectra with 
very less intensity.
Figure 4. Raman analysis of ex situ  treated tracer fibre and blended cotton fibre
2 % of this ex situ treated tracer fibre was blended 
with cotton fibre. This blend was analyzed in the 
Raman spectrometer. It was found out that the
16tracer chem ical can be identified by this 
technique in the fibre blend.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.4 CORE AREA - IV: CHEMICAL & BIOCHEMICAL PROCESSING AND  
BIOMASS & BY-PRODUCTS UTILISATION
2.4.1 Toxicological and Environmental impact of ICAR-CIRCOT's nanomaterials  
(Nanocellulose, Nanosilver and Nano-ZnO)
Toxicological study of nanosilver treated cotton  
fabric and nanocellulose
As a prelim inary study of cytotoxicity of 
nanosilver treated fabric and nanocellulose, pure 
cultures of microbial flora (4 microorganisms) 
isolated from various habitats were used. 
Nanosilver treated and untreated fabric swatches 
were placed on nutrient agar plates surface 
inoculated with 24 h cultures. Since nanocellulose 
does not dissolve in water, it was tested by the 
agar ditch method against the four cultures, as 
given below.
1) Pantoea agglomerans-  isolated from cotton 
bolls, beneficial in removing stickiness
2) Pseudomonas putida-  a soil inhabitant useful 
in bioremediation3) Bacillussubtilis- a soil inhabitant useful in seed 
protection as a fungicide
4) Pseudomonas aeruginosa-  an omnipresent 
organism beneficial in biodegradation and 
bioremediation
The images of the experimental setup after the 
incubation period is given in figure 5. From these 
images, it can be seen that nanosilver treated 
cotton fabric exhibited antibacterial activity 
against all the four cultures tested, as there was 
no growth below the fabric swatches as well as 
there was a marginal to about 1 mm size zone of 
inhibition. On the other hand, nanocellulose did 
not exhibit any antagonism towards all the four 
bacterial cultures.
Figure 5: Antibacterial effect of silver nitrate treated fabric (left) and of nanocellulose (right)
Life cycle assessment (LCA):
Nanocellulose from cotton is being produced at 
ICAR-CIRCOT in the pilot plant with the capacity of 
10 kg per shift of 8 h. The material inventory 
required for the production of nanocellulose 
using the novel chemo-mechanical process fromcotton is collected for use in life cycle assessment 
as per the ISO standard. The openLCA software is 
being used for this analysis. The system boundary 
developed for the NCC assessment is given in the 
figure 6.
2. The approach followed will be Cradle-to-Gate.
17

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
thcuri c a li Energy J C  WaiterNaturn Resources
(fossil fuel /  fo rest resources /  waterair)
System Boundary
Prod uctionCotton NCC GateProcess
Emissions
(gas, liquid, 
solid!
Figure 6 .  Cradle-to-Gate Approach for LCA of NCC
Process for detoxification of nanosilver
Since the nanosilver is demonstrated to be toxic 
against the tested organism s as per the 
preliminary report, experiments have been 
conducted to convert the nanoparticles of silver 
(Ag°) into ionic silver particles (Ag+). For this 
purpose, silver nanoparticles synthesized by 
chemical reduction method using PVP, Tannic acid 
and Citrate as stabilizers were taken as substrate. 
The size of the nanoparticles were in the range of 
5-2° nm. The nanoparticles were stable under 
environmental condition and were used for giving 
functional finishes to textile materials like 
antimicrobial, antifungal etc. The nanoparticlesafter completion of the process were treated with 
different concentrations of 5°%  hydrogen 
peroxide solution to find out the stability. From 
the experiment, it is found that addition of °.5-1% 
of hydrogen peroxide completely converts the 
nanosilver to ionic silver that is evident from the 
disappearance of yellow  colour of silver 
nanoparticles. This was confirmed by DLS particle 
size analyser, wherein no scattering intensity was 
observed from nanosilver after treatment with 
the hydrogen peroxide. This method can be used 
to nullify the toxicity associated from the effluent 
of nanosilver based treatment processes.
2.5 CORE AREA - V: ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND HUMAN RESOURCE  
DEVELOPMENT
2.5.1 Development of nanocellulose based edible coating for fruits and vegetables
In order to evaluate the role of vegetable oil in 
coating, formulations were prepared with and 
without vegetable oil. Various formulation were 
composed of sodium alginate, nanocellulose and 
vegetable oil. Guava fruits were coated with theprepared formulations and stored under ambient 
condition. The fruits remained intact for upto 3 
days when uncoated, 6 days upon coating without 
vegetable oil and more than 12 days in formula 
containing both vegetable oil & nanocellulose.
18

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Untreated Alginate Alginate-NC Alginate-NC-oil
o
Q J■<L U
o
Q J■<t o
Figure 7. Guavas coated with various coating formulations stored under ambient condition
2.5.2 Refinement and popularisation of nutrient-enriched compost production  
from cotton micro-dust
Composting is one of the sustainable approaches 
for conversion of cotton micro-dust waste into 
nutrient enriched compost and thereby its 
management. Microorganisms with cellulolytic 
activities have important role in composting but 
they may not tolerate thermophilic phase. 
Microorganisms with cellulolytic potency and 
operating at thermophilic temperatures could 
accelerate the composting process which in turn 
could increase the thermophilic phase and 
thereby reduce the duration of composting.
In the present project, attempts were made to 
identify cellulolytic microorganisms which can 
tolerate high temperatures for their exploitation 
in composting of cotton micro-dust. A trial 
experiment for composting of cotton micro-dust 
was carried out at Kalmeshwar, Nagpur (Fig.1). 
The chemical properties of final compost were 
analysed and it had the following properties: 
organic carbon -  12%, total nitrogen -  1.5%, with 
C:N ratio of 8:1 (Table 1). The compost samples 
were enriched with carboxymethylcellulose 
(CMC) as sole carbon source and incubated at 55°C for 5 days. After incubation, it was serially 
diluted and aliquots of 100 | a l were spread on 
Nutrient Agar (NA) and incubated. The distinct 
morphotypes were picked and purified on NA by 
repeated streaking. A total of twenty microbial 
isolates were obtained and they were screened 
for production of cellulase enzyme on Reese's 
mineral medium supplemented with 1% (w/v) 
CMC at 55 °C. The colonies which showed orange 
halo zone around their growth indicated positive 
for cellulase enzyme production. Among 20 
isolates, 5 isolates were found to produce 
cellulase enzyme at thermophilic temperature 
(55 °C).
Fig.8 composting of Cotton Micro-dust
19

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Table 1. Chemical properties of Cotton micro-dust and compost
Sample Organic 
Carbon (%)Total Nitrogen (%) C: N ratio (%)
Cotton Micro-dust 35 1.0 35:1
Compost 12 1.5 8:1
2.5.3 Development of process protocol for synthesis of nano-sulphur and its  
application in agriculture
Elemental sulphur is a cheap and abundant 
source of sulphur in nature and in order to make 
the overall process economical, elemental 
sulphur was utilized for the synthesis of 
nanosulphur by adopting bottom up and top 
down approaches. In bottom up approach, 
sodium thiosulphate (Na2 S2 O 3 ) was used as 
precursor and acids viz. oxalic acid, hydrochloric 
acid (HCl) and acetic acid were utilized for 
obtaining nanosulphur. During the process, 
different protocols with variable concentrations 
of precursor as well as acids was tried out. The 
nanosulphur emulsions were stabilized using 
surfactants (CTAB, Tween 80, Nonyl-phenol 
ethoxylate, SPAN 85). Since the issues related to 
yield and scaling up ability at commercial level 
nanosulphur yield from bottom up approach is 
less and the process is not economical, therefore,
SEM image of nano-sulphurchemo-mechanical approaches are adopted in 
this study.
Mass colloidar, high pressure homogenizer and 
ultra-high pressure homogenizer were utilized by 
standardizing the process protocol involving the 
concentration of elemental sulphur, surfactant, 
stirring time, operating pressure, number of 
passes etc. Nanosulphur was synthesized and its 
characterization (particle size, zeta potential, 
scanning electron microscopy, surface area) was 
performed. The particle settlement study with 
reference to time of the different nanosulphur 
formulations was also evaluated. The average 
particle size of the mass colloidar sample was in 
the range of 284-430 nm as evaluated using the 
particle size analyzer.
P H H f N p i ^ i r T  ____ ______ _ _____
•ZokAran  i n » j .  3
Particle size distribution of nano-sulphur
20

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.5.4 Impact Assessment of CIRCOT technologies
The objective of the project is to develop suitable 
methodological framework for evaluation of the 
impact of the technologies developed by the 
institute. Initially five technologies have been 
identified to carry out the impact evaluation 
study. During the initial phase of the project
I. The variables have been identified and the 
questionnaire has been developed to collectthe requisite inform ation for im pact 
assessment
ii. Secondary data on the list of customers/ 
stakeholders on the identified institute 
technologies have been collected
iii. Economic surplus approach has been 
identified to quantify the economic impact 
of the CIRCOT-Bajaj Pre-cleaner technology
2.6 CONSORTIA RESEARCH PROJECT (CRP) ON NATURAL FIBRES
2.6.1 Development of cotton incorporated Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
body suit with smart respirator for healthcare workers with enhanced comfort
(i) Cotton incorporated PPE
The PPEs available in the market were procured 
and analyzed for its properties. The properties are 
presented in the Table 2, which shows the PPEsare available with different GSM and thickness. 
Air permeability was also found to vary due to 
variable pore sizes as confirmed by the SEM 
analysis.
Table 2. Physical Properties of the PPEs
Property A B C D
GSM 88.6 24.6 52.1 48.4
Thickness
(mm)0.47 0.29 0.42 0.42
Air resistivity 
(kPa.S/m)Not permeable 0.016 0.064 0.029
Table 3. MMT properties of PPE materials
No. Properties A B C D
I Wetting Time T op (sec) 1.563 1.485 1.485 1.406
ii Wetting Time bottom (sec) 119.953 119.953 119.953 119.953
iii Top Absorption Rate ( % /sec) 35.355 23.434 25.569 20.865
Iv Bottom Absorption Rate (%/sec) 0 0 0 0
V Top Max Wetted Radius (mm) 5 5 5 5
Vi Bottom Max Wetted Radius (mm) 0 0 0 0
Vii Top Spreading Speed (mm/sec) 2.909 3.199 3.199 3.201
Viii Bottom Spreading Speed mm/sec 0 0 0 0
ix Accumulative One way Transfer 
Index (%)-954.048 -882.914 -930.309 -818.834
21

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Moisture management properties of the PPEs 
fabric were determined using MMT analyser. It 
was found out that the PPEs were having very 
poor MMT properties (Table 3). To improve the 
comfort of PPE material it was attempted to usecellulosic based hydrophilic material. It was 
hypothesised that cotton based web will improve 
the MMT properties of PPE if it is kept inside the 
PPE. Cotton non-woven fabric was prepared by 
the following method.
T able 4. MMT properties of the modified PPE materials
No. Properties A B C D Cotton Non-  
woven
I Wetting Time T op (sec) 1.406 1.406 1.485 1.563 1.523
Ii Wetting Time bottom (sec) 119.953 119.953 119.954 119.953 4.7575
Iii Top Absorption Rate 
( % /sec)24.212 17.635 18.318 11.231 19.5677
Iv Bottom Absorption Rate 
(%/sec)0 0 0 0 37.046
V Top Max Wetted Radius 
(mm)5 5 5 5 20
Vi Bottom Max Wetted 
Radius (mm)0 0 0 0 20
Vii Top Spreading Speed 
(mm/sec)3.199 3.199 3.199 3.047 5.006
Viii Bottom Spreading Speed 
mm/sec0 0 0 0 3.8426
ix Accumulative One way 
Transfer Index (%)-455.552 -438.091 -440.556 -475.801 -149.612
From Table 4, it can be seen that sandwiching 
cotton non-woven fabric (40 GSM) has improved 
the MMT properties of PPE materials. Improved 
comfort of the modified material was further 
confirmed by determination of Q-Max value 
which gives the instant cooling property of the 
material
Table 5: Q-Max value of the PPE material
Nature of material Q-Max
PPE 0.071
Cotton Sandwiched material 0.145(ii) Development of cooling belt and vest  
using Peltier module
In initial part of research work, a cooling belt has 
been made using Peltier module. This will provide 
cooling air circulation through a mini circulating 
fan. Complete setup will function using a 10Ah DC 
battery with 2A, 5V power supply. The power 
consumption and rate of cooling at different 
voltages were studied (Table 6).
22

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Table 6. Power consumption and rate of Cooling in Peltier module
S. No. Voltage Applied (volt) Time (minutes) Temperature of the  
Peltier module (°C)
2 25
1. 2 3 22
5 20
2 22
2. 3 3 19
5 18
2 20
3. 5 3 18
5 15
Experiment was carried out at ambient conditions 
(30°C) as initial temperature and measured for 
cooling at various time intervals. A control switch 
was also connected in the circuit with 3 modes of 
options to control the input voltage. To 
neutralize the heat generated by the peltier
Pettier Module with heat sink and fan
Figure 9. Cooling belt Model using Peltiermodule, heat sinks were attached at both the 
sides with circulating fan as give in the figure 9. 
Figure 10 shows the cotton and synthetic fabric 
based cooling belts developed in the project. It 
was found out that by using cotton fabric the 
weight of the belts can be substantially reduced.
Figure 10: Developed cooling belts  
(A) Cotton fabric (B) Synthetic fabric
2.6.2 Development of Cotton Based face mask with improved particle filtration  
efficiency and breathability using electro spun nano materials and antiviral coatings
1. Pore size analysis of different fabric used for  
mask production
Initial study has been carried out to study the 
pore size properties of different materials like 
m elt blow n nonw oven fa b ric , plain 
nonwoven fabric etc used for face maskproduction using SEM. From the results, it is 
inferred that all the cotton based materials 
have the fibre diameter in the range of 12- 
16|a. The fibre diameter is four times higher 
than the polypropylene melt blown fibres. 
The pore size of the plain woven fabric is in
23

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
the range of 29-61|a. From the study, it is 
inferred that the pore sizes of cotton based 
w oven/knitted fabrics are very large 
compared to the polypropylene based 
nonwoven materials. These cotton based 
fabrics have to be layered to get the required 
filtration properties.
2. Production of Electro spinning based  
nanofibre Mat:
The electrospun mat was produced usingNeedleless electrospun production m/c 
(make ELMARCO, Czech Republic) at BTRA, 
Mumbai. The nylon nano fibres produced on 
the m achine was d ep o site d  on the 
polypropylene nonwoven fabric of 40 gsm. 
The SEM of electrospun layers of nylon 
polymer on polypropylene nonwoven fabric 
are given as Figure 11.
Fig. 11. The SEM Electrospun nanofibres at 3500x and 10000x magnifications
S.
NoType of fabric/nonwoven Fibre diameter of  
substrate (^)Fibre diameter of  
nanofibrils (nm)Approx pore size  
M /  (nm)
1. Electospun layer of 
commercial mask26 in substrate/ 300 0.2-0.5/ 200-500
2. Polypropylene fabric 30 - 10-25
3. Electrospun coated PP 30 in substrate 100-130 0.05-0.1/ 50-100
4. Melt blown fabric (30 gsm) 2-3 - 4-8
From the above table, it is inferred that the 
electro spun mat produced using nylon polymer 
contains nano fibrils of size of 50-100nm. When 
the pore size is compared with melt blown fabric 
which has fibre diameter of 2-3|a, and pore size of4-8|a, the electrospun mat has much lower 
diameter fibres and the pore size is less than 
100 nm. The thermal analysis of electrospun 
mat was carried out using Netsch Thermo 
Gravim etric Analyser and carbon content

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
analysis was done using Shimadzu TOC solid 
module analyser. From the results it is inferred 
that the developed nano mat has thermal 
stability up to 300°C and the carbon content was 
81-82%
Development of Masks using Electrospun  
Nanofibre Mat
The electrospun mat based mask was produced 
using three layered structure viz. Top Layer - 
Polyester- provide water repellent & quick drying; 
Middle Layer- Electrospun Mat is sandwiched 
between the Polyproylene non-woven fabrics; 
Inner Layer -- Cotton fabric (Open structure). 
The developed mask was tested for air 
permeability and particle filtration efficiency 
which showed the valued 48.26 ft3  /min/ft2  & 
54.3% respectively.
Fig. 12 Development of Reusable Cotton mask 
In this study, a three layered fabric based mask 
was developed with the construction of Top Layer 
- Polyester- provide water repellent property & 
quick drying, Middle Layer (Optional)- Cotton 
fabric &Inner Layer -- Cotton fabric, 110 gsm. The 
air permeability and particle filtration efficiency 
properties of the developed mask were 41 ft3  
/min/ft2 & 51% respectively.Development of 100 % Cotton Engineered  
fabric structure for face mask application
100% cotton double fabric structure was 
introduced to suit the requirement of high air 
permeability with higher particle filtration 
efficiency for face mask applications. Two 
different yarn counts (40s & 60s) were used for 
fabric constructions and three different structure 
combination fabrics were developed.
Construction of Double Fabric structure
The p ro d uced  d o u b le  fa b ric  stru c tu re  
construction is opposite to each other as shown in 
figure 13. In single repeat, two different 
structures were introduced in a diagonal direction 
and the same structure was reversed in face fabric 
(opposite layer). Out of two structures, one is 
highly floated structure and hence the air 
permeability was good and the other structure 
was a compact structure with high air resistance. 
Due to sim ultaneous com pact and open 
structure, the air movement was diverted from 
the compact structure and transferred through 
the open structure; hence the air permeability 
was maintained. But the particles which are 
travelled along with the air can be filtered through 
compact fabric structure which is present in the 
opposite direction
1 2
3 4
Fig:13 schematic diagram of Double fabric
construction; First Layer (1, 4 Compact structure) 
(2, 3 open high float structure); Second Layer (2, 3
Compact structure) (1,4 open high float structure)
25

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Double fabric Air permeability Comparison with  
different Yarn Count:
The air permeability is directly proportional 
to yarn count. It was increased with the finer 
count in same fabric structure due to reduced 
yarn diameter and cover factor. The trend was 
similar in all three structures. But based on fabric 
structure, the air perm eability ratio was 
different concerning yarn count. Higher air 
permeability was noticed in plain/matty structure 
com bination compared to the other twostructure combinations.
Double fabric Air permeability comparison  
based on structure combinations:
Based on the fabric structure the double fabric air 
perm eability was varied, plain and matty 
structure combination fabric air permeability was 
comparatively higher around 45% compared 
to plain/oxford and plain/tw ill structure 
respectively. A similar trend was observed for 
60s Ne fabric structure.
Table 7 :  The Particle Filtration Efficiency of Engineered Fabric structures
S.
No.Weave structure Yarn count Double cloth Double  
fabric air permeability  
(Ft7min/Ft2 )Particle Filtration  
Efficiency (%)
1 Plain / matty 40 X40 151.34 -
2 Plain / matty 60X60 377.20 0.8
3 Plain / oxford 40 X40 158.18 31.3
3a Plain/ oxford double 40 X40 -- 33.9
4 Plain / oxford 60X60 570.18 39.2
5 Plain / 3/1 twill 40 X40 151.34 19.8
5a Plain / 3/1 twill double 40 X40 -- 27.8
6 Plain / 3/1 twill 60X60 415.55 15.2
Development of antibacterial and hydrophobic  
coating to reusable cotton based mask for  
general public
Face mask is worn close to mouth and nose, a 
safest and non-leaching type antimicrobial is 
required.In this study, it is attempted to developNon-leaching Silver coated Cotton fabric for 
Mask by Exhaust & Pad-dry-cure methods and 
also  by u sin g c a tio n ic  p o lym e rs. The 
antimicrobial testing results of the above treated 
materials are given below.
S. No. Type of fabric Type of Organism Zone of inhibition in mm
1 Non leaching insitu silver 
nano treated fabric by 
exhaust methodStaphylococcus aureus Nil. But no growth 
beneath the fabric
Klebsiella pneumoniae 5.0
2 Non leaching insitu silver 
nano treated fabric by 
Pad-dry-cure processStaphylococcus aureus Nil. But no growth 
beneath the fabric
Klebsiella pneumoniae 7.0
26

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
S. No. Type of fabric Type of Organism Zone of inhibition in mm
3 Cationic Polymer( CAT -R) 
treated FabricStaphylococcus aureus Nil. But no growth 
beneath the fabric
Klebsiella pneumoniae Nil. But no growth 
beneath the fabric
4 Control Fabric Staphylococcus aureus Nil
Klebsiella pneumoniae Nil
Development of Test Jig for testing the efficacy  
of filter fabric for indoor decontamination
Indoor air pollution is a complex issue involving a 
wide diversity and variability of pollutants that 
have affected the human health. Known example 
for air pollutants which are produced by 
human activity includes nitrogen oxides, 
sulfurdioxide, carbon monoxide and volatile 
organic compounds. The exposure to these 
pollutants is associated with numerous effects 
on human health, including increased respiratory 
symptoms, hospitalization for heart or lung 
diseases, and even premature death. Therefore, 
an equipment has been conceptualized and 
designed for testing the efficacy of materials (non- 
woven, knitted or any other porous material, 
filters etc.) to filter out the hazardous substances 
like p articu late  m atter, vo la tile  organic 
compounds, carbon dioxide and formaldehyde 
and measure the air quality along with other 
environm ental conditions. The proposed 
equipment will consist of two major components 
i.e. the test jig, measurement and display 
electronics.
Test Jig:
• The Test Jig consists of two chambers namely 
control chamber and result chamber.• The sample gases with controlled and known 
concentration will be passed into the control 
chamber.
• After a predetermined settling time, the 
contents of the result chamber will be 
analyzed to determine the filtering capability 
of the fabric under test.
• Sensors will measure the concentration of 
gases in the control chamber and the result 
chamber.
• The Measurement and Display Electronics 
(MDE) will interface with the sensors in the 
Control Chamber and the Result Chamber 
and collect the real-time data.
• This data will be processed and stored in the 
MDE.
• The data will be retrievable from the MDE 
using a USB Flash Drive.
• The data collected by the MDE will be 
displayed real-time on a 7" touchscreen 
display using graphs.
27

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.7 EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
2.7.1 ICAR-CIRCOT-Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) Centre
ICAR-CIRCOT Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) 
Centre promotes incubation and business 
development in cotton and its by-products, 
conducts techno-entrepreneurial activities in 
cotton value chain for building prospective 
clientele and facilitates skill development in 
selected stakeholders related to cotton sector. 
During the current year two new entrepreneurs 
where admitted at ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI Centre for 
incubation on different te ch n o lo gie s as 
Development of Particle Boards with innovative 
adhesive and Eco-friendly Dyeing & Finishing of 
Khadi and Handloom Fabric. Two incubatees 
graduated from the incubation centre namely 
M/s. Kotak Commodities, Mumbai for innovation 
tilted Preparation of Value Added Products using 
Naturally Coloured Cotton" and M/s. Shree Agro 
Invent Tech Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai for innovation titled 
"Conceptualization, Design and development of 
technically Advanced Textile Materials and
Sustainable 6 pack Beer Packaging made 
by by M/s. Fumalabs Pvt. Ltd.conversion to related Products". One new product 
developed by ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI Centre incubatee 
M/s. Shree Agro Invent Tech Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai 
was developed and com m ercialized. The 
incubatee developed Cotton rich high comfort T- 
shirt with smart drying knitted fabric and supplied 
product worth Rs. 110 lakhs to stakeholders. Four 
specialized training programmes, two workshops, 
online mentoring sessions, Telephonic call/talks, 
were undertaken for guiding and mentoring the 
incubatees and other trainees amidst covid 
pandemic during the year 2020 by ICAR-CIRCOT- 
ABI Centre.
Covid 19 advisory for the stakeholders were 
prepared in four Indian languages (English, Hindi, 
Marathi & Tamil). In this connection 2500 emails 
were sent to different stakeholders/ incubatees/ 
startups and 500 numbers of Whatsapp messages 
were sent.
Particle Boards with innovative adhesive made by 
M/s. Fumalabs Pvt. Ltd.
Cotton rich high comfort T-shirt with smart 
drying knitted fabric developed by incubatee 
M/s. Shree Agro Invent Tech Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai
28

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.7.2 Valorization of Cottonseed Meal: Extraction of Quality Protein for improving  
the Livelihood of Cotton Farmers (DST)
Optim ization of protein extraction from  
cotionseed meal
For optimizing the recovery of the protein from 
cottonseed meal (CSM) obtained from Clean 
Cotton Impex, Pitchampalayam Pudur, Tiruppur, 
Tamil Nadu, India. pH more than 10 was found to 
p lay im p o rta n t role in e xtra ctio n  and 
solubilization of protein in extracting media. 
Hence, alkali-based extraction was used and 
single factor experiments were conducted byusing five factors i.e., sample to solvent ratio, 
Time, KOH, NaCl and Na2SO3 concentration to 
determine the optimum conditions for extraction 
of protein from CSM. Results showed alkali 
extraction followed by ethanol precipitation 
(pH=7) and citric acid precipitation (at isoelectric 
point of CSM protein) resulted in maximum 
protein recovery than other methods. Figure 14 
displays overall methodology used for extraction 
and analysis of cottonseed protein.
IMuLltd t SM
Rtrepnmc h eIulc rthrtlii.yJiif' '|:v (H SM  ! ■
E  njvialiii/i^f hy H 5M
N I  H  n  n s  o i i  m u.  ■ lim e  M il!
1-dH k‘LJLtlH IX'JI jI p i Ck. IL!Ll.lhl'i3 E U t a ih w  i^ ap iiiilto n
t  imiJliimJ.1 ItcuperfEie* I'ln'SIs-VhernKJl L'vii>IirXli.-iH. m id pnM firititjrv
pruiw nw *
Fig. 14. Flow diagram of the experiments and activities performed under the project.
Alkali-based extraction was chosen with different 
input factors and yielded more than 80 and 70% 
protein when precipitated with ethanol and citric 
acid (at isoelectric point) respectively. At the 
same time, free gossypol was found minimal in 
case of ethanol and isoelectric point precipitation 
respectively. Both the precipitation techniques 
give high recovery of protein with high total 
protein content and low gossypol content (0.03% 
of free gossypol).
Optimization of protein hydrolysate from  
cottonseed meal and protein:
Enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out using two 
enzymes, pancreatine and pepsin. The optimizedcottonseed hydrolysate present high degree of 
hydrolysis and shown good potential to be utilized 
in functional foods.
Characterizing the isolated protein for food and  
feed application
Isolated protein was characterized by doing 
proximate analysis and evaluating gossypol 
concentration and functional food properties. 
Negligible gossypol concentration of free 
gossypol 0.03% and higher protein content with 
excellent functional food properties suggested 
use of cottonseed protein in bakery and other 
edible product toxicological evaluation is 
underway
29

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
2.7.3 An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Sustainable Cotton Marketing in the  
State of Maharashtra (NASF)
The project aims to empirically prove that 
marketing of the cotton based on objective 
quality assessment compared to the existing 
subjective quality assessment will be more 
inclusive making the farmers a part of the cotton 
value chain enabling them to get remunerative 
price. During the reporting period the primary 
survey was carried out in the districts of Yavatmal 
(Teh sil: Ralegao n, Pusad, G h a ta n ji and 
Babhulgaon) districts of Maharashtra covering 
over 100 cotton farmers comprising small, 
medium and large farmers besides ginners and 
traders. Earlier, primary data from about 300 
farmers from the districts of Aurangabad, 
Amaravati and Jalgaon were collected and 
analysed.
Profitability and Choice of Marketing Channel:
•  Cotton is more profitable crop among other 
alternate crops with an average net income 
Rs. 15302 /ha (profit of Rs.920/quintal).
•  Farmers are aligning with the Better Cotton 
Initiative (BCI) to streamline their cultivation 
practices and have seen 12% reduction in 
their cost of cultivation as compared to non- 
BCI farmers.
•  The preferred marketing channel is traders 
(46%), village merchants/agents (28%) 
followed by ginners (23%) despite the fact 
that high price realization accrue to the 
farmers by selling it to ginners.
•  It is also found that the profitability of the 
farmers is also dependent on the choice of 
the marketing channel. Price realized by the 
farmers by selling to ginners amount to 
Rs.5100/- per quintal whereas it is Rs 4880/-and Rs.4600/- per quintal for traders and 
village agents respectively. There is a margin 
of around Rs.500/- per quintal in sale at farm 
gate and at ginning factory
Price Quality Linkage
•  A n o th e r reason for the low er price 
realization to the farmers is lack of quality 
consciousness during harvest and post­
harvest operations. The harvested cotton is 
neither stored nor sold according to its 
quality by many farmers.
•  The price quality linkage of the existing 
marketing practices show that staple length 
and colour grade has positive relation and 
significant influence on price, whereas other 
parameters do not exert any influence on the 
price. In case of the public procurement 
o p eratio n  m o istu re co n tent plays a 
significant role and is inversely related to the 
price.
Biomass Utilization
•  There is ample potential to increase the farm 
income by commercial exploitation of the 
cotton stalks. 70 per cent of the surveyed 
farmers have burnt the stalks in the field and 
10 per cent use it for household purpose and 
rest of them plough the stalks in the field. The 
farmers incur additional cost of Rs.800-1000/- 
per hectare for management of stalks.
•  Role of Farmer Producers Organisation in 
cotton marketing is identified as promising 
alternative that will serve to improve the 
benefits to the farmers.
30

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Procurement of Cotton at Ginning Factory site under MSP operation in Yavatmal.
Visit to farmers growing desi cotton in Yavatmal.
2.7.4 Technology Incubation -  RAFTAAR Agri-Business Incubation (DAC&FW)
RKVY Division of Ministry of Agriculture has 
sanctioned CIRCOT to work as Agri Business 
Incubator under RAFTAAR (Rem unerative 
A p pro aches for Agri and A llied  Sectors 
Rejuvenation) scheme from 31s t January 2019. 
Since then, CIRCOT has got a new wing with which 
it can expand its reach to Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors.
CIRCOT-RKVY-RAFTAAR -ABI provides a platform 
to raw talent not only to materialize their 
innovative ideas in agriculture and allied sectors 
but also to commercialize them. Through this 
platform individuals/ startups with innovativeideas can have access to CIRCOT's experienced 
expertise and standard testing laboratories to 
bring their ideas in reality. All necessary 
nurturing, mentoring and financial grant in aid 
will be made available through this platform. This 
wing of CIRCOT will focus on strengthening the 
Agriculture sector which is the back bone of 
Indian Economy by building a new line of Agri 
innovators and agri-enterpreneurs. This line will 
provide new remunerative approaches of Indian 
Agriculture which will attract Indian Youth 
towards Agriculture.
31

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
CIRCOT-R-ABI will facilitate incorporation of 
entities for all viable business ideas by the interns. 
Selected interns will be eligible to apply for 
Idea/Pre-Seed Stage Funding, of grant in aid up to 
Rs. 5 lakhs per startup for converting his/her 
innovative idea into prototype/product. And Seed 
Stage Funding scheme provides Grant in aid to 
Startups. Under this scheme financial assistance 
of maximum up to Rs. 25 lakhs will be granted to 
potential startups that have a Minimum Viable 
Product (MVP) based on innovative solutions/ 
processes /products/ services/ business model in 
agriculture and allied sectors.
This Scheme covers below focus areas like- Pulp, 
Paper & Packaging, Precision Farming, Foodprocessing, Agri Extension Education, Post­
Harvest processing, Agriculture Biotechnology, 
Waste to Wealth, Farm Retailing Supply Chain 
Management, Internet of Things (IOT), Farm 
M echanisation, Animal Husbandry, Green 
Composite, Briquetting & pelleting, Natural 
Resource Management, Agri clinic & Farm Health 
Services, Cotton and other Natural Fibres, 
S u s t a in a b le  A g r i/ O r g a n ic  F a r m in g , 
Nanotechnology Application Agriculture, Agri 
Input Tools & Technology etc.
As per the Guidelines of RKVY-RAFTAAR, the 
CIRCOT-R-ABI centre runs under continuous 
guidance & supervision of RAFTAAR incubation 
committee (RIC),
CIRCOT-RAFTAAR Incubation committee (RIC)
Sr. No. Name Designation Role In RIC
1 Dr. P . G. Patil Director, ICAR -CIRCOT, Mumbai Chairman (Head of the 
Institution)
2 Dr. G. R. Anap Former International Cotton Consultant, 
World Bank Project (Africa)Member (Domain Expert 
from Industry)
3 Prof. (Dr.) A. S. 
VastradProfessor and Dy. Director Student Welfare, 
University of Agricultural Science (UAS), 
DharwadMember, (RKVY 
Knowledge Partner 
nominee)
4 Dr. N. J. Thakor Former Dean, College of Agricultural 
Engineering and Technology, Dr. BSKV, DapoliDomain Expert (Invitee) 
CIRCOT-R-ABI)
5 Prof. (Dr.) V. D. 
GotmareAssociate Professor, Department of Textile 
Manufactures, VJTI, MumbaiMember (Domain Expert 
from Academia)
6 Mr. Ramesh. R 
KadamRTD, General Manager, Bank of India Member
(Representative of Bank)
7 Shri. D. B. Bote Joint Director (Soil Conservation), 
Commissionerate of Agriculture, PuneMember (State 
representative from the 
state Department of 
Agriculture)
8 Dr. Ashok Kumar 
BharimallaSenior Scientist & Head I/c., TTD, ICAR- 
CIRCOT, MumbaiMember Secretary (PI) - 
Chief Executive Officer 
(PI-CEO), CIRCOT-R-ABI)
For wide publicity of the scheme and to reach a 
greater number of agri-innovators CIRCOT-R-ABI 
team developed website, designed information 
brochures which were inaugurated by Mr. 
Sushilkumar (IAS), Additional Secretary, DARE on 
1s t May 2019.
32Fourteen (14) agri-start-ups were incubated at 
CIRCOT-R-ABI during first cohort of the scheme. 
RKVY Division of DoAC&FW, MoA&FW, New Delhi 
has sanctioned them grant-in-aid of Rs.144.5 
Lakhs viz letter No. 12-27I2020-RKVY Dated 3r d  
August 2020.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Sectorwise Agri-start-up Incubated under 2n d
COHORT
■ Food Processing
■  f-jn m  M e ch a n iza tio n
■ iol
Tm iles/tottcin P ro ce ssin g
■  S u p ii-ly  L h m ln
■ Waste to weaith
■ Value Addition to harm Produce
Application for Pre-seed Stage funding (up to Rs. 5 lakhs) 2nd  Cohort CIC recommended to  
RKVY-RAFTAAR Selection and Monitoring Commitiee for funding
Sr. No. Agri-startup Innovation
1 M/s. ELECTRO SPARK SOLUTIONS 
(Mr. Harish R Bhagat)Development of cost-effective smart irrigation 
system
2 M/s. SETU AGRO-BIOTECH AND 
TEXTILE INDUSTRY PVT LTD 
(Mr. Vyomkesh R Vhanbatte)Cost effective hydroponic system
3 M/s/ SIDHDHAGANGA BIO PRODUCTS 
(Mr. Vijay Hirejagner)Development of utensils by using arecanut leaves.
4 M/s. 21CFARM TECHNOVATIONS LLP. 
(Mr. Sourav A Kedar)Development of Artificial Intelligence based Fruit 
Crop Disease and Pest, warning & Prediction system
Applicants for Seed-Stage Funding (up to Rs 25 Lakhs)
Sr. No. Agri-startup Innovation
1M/s K B DESHMUKH DAIRY FARM 
(Mr. Kiran Bapusaheb Deshmukh)Development of sustainable supply chain of Organic 
milk and milk products
2M/s. ENERGY CHAKRA
(Mr. Sudarshan Ramrao Ghorpade)Development of Hybrid solar dryer
3M/s. PAWAAK FOODS 
(Mr. Kaushal Dongre)Production of Chemical free Jaggery in innovative 
cube shape with enhanced shelf life
4M/s. VAISHVIK SOCIAL FABRICS LLP 
(Mrs. Prerna Prashant Sude)A Social innovation to employ differently abled 
persons for textile product manufacturing through 
ergonomically designed machines suitable to be 
operated by differently abled persons.
33

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
5M/s. INDRADHANU MUSHROOM 
(Mr. Rohan Gangadhar Thakare)Use of Ice ball technology for cost effective 
production of button mushroom
6M/s. VIDARBHA SALES 
(Mrs. Minal Hatwar)Cost effective and ecofriendly Green-Crematorium
7M/s SANJIVANI AGRO MACHINERY 
(Mr. Pranay Choudhary)Continues Feeding Stove (CFS) using pallets made 
out of Agro biomass
8M/s. AARDE-PATIL PHARMA PVT LTD 
(Dr. Sushant Sarjerao Patil)Extraction of medicinal plant extracts and its use 
innovative ayurvedic drug formulations.
9M/s. MANDESHI GOAT FARM 
(Mrs Sharmila Jagdish Gaikwad)Development of Goat Farming Cluster to strengthen 
the supply Chain management of Meat and 
diversified Goat Milk Products and provide 
employment to rural women
10M/s. VARAD ENGINEERING LLP 
(Mr. Harshad Tanaji Magar)Development of Fully Automatic Spraying Machine 
for agricultural application
11M/s. VASUNDHARA SHASHWAT SHETI 
MAL UTPADAK& PRAKRIYA SANSTHA 
(Mr. Shriniwas Bagal)Development of diversified jaggery based products 
like jaggery syrup, jaggery powder, granules, chunks 
etc using organically grown sugar cane
12M/s. MEDICON
(Ms. Apoorva Uttam Bajaj)Innovative process protocol for production of 
absorbent cotton reducing the use of natural 
resources and l  effluents.
13M/s. SR FOODS BREWERYS 
(Mr. Rahul Vijay Joshi)Development of food products based on cashew 
apple e.g., nectar, cookies made using cashew apple 
pomace powder.
14M/s. ENVIR ERA
(Mr. Sushant Shivaji Pawar)Eco-Friendly Brake Pads using agro-residues for 
Automotive Industry
15M/s. PRAFULLA WINERY AND
HOSPITALITY PVT LTD
(Mrs Manjula Mahesh Deshmukh)Development of innovative process protocol for 
production of beet root wine.
16M/s. RAMKRISHNA FRESH 
(Mr. Avadhut Dongare)Inclusive Business Model for Supply of Fruits and 
Vegetables
17M/s. SAMRTHA MAKACHUNI CENTRE 
(Mr. Abhijeet Prakash Deshmukh)Chelated animal feed of maze with added flavor, 
minerals, calcium etc.
18 M/s/ SHRI KRISHNA PLASTIC 
(Mr. Badal Sejpal)Development of Innovative Partially Biodegradable 
Mulching Sheets for Agriculture
19M/s. SAI DADA AGRO INDUSTRIES 
(Mr Uday Nagane)Development of innovative process protocol to 
increase the yield of neem seed oil and integration 
of manufacturing facilities for neem seed oil based 
cosmetic products.
20M/s/. RAMIZ AGRO FOOD INDUSTRIES 
(Mr. Omkar Ramchandra Patil)Fortification of vermicelli with natural fruit pulp for 
making a healthy food.
34

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
3. TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
ICAR-CIRCOT carries out basic & strategic 
research in processing of cotton and its agro 
residues, development of value added products 
and quality assessment. The research work 
results in development of machinery, products 
and process protocols. The Institute is also 
engaged in the refinement of the already 
developed technologies in the areas of post­
harvest processing of cotton, eco-friendly 
finishing of textiles and value addition of cotton 
stalks. Technologies developed are protected 
through management of intellectual property 
righ ts. A sse ssm e n t, p o p u la rizatio n  and 
commercial adoption of viable technologies are 
carried out regularly through demonstrations, 
industrial trials, awareness meets, exhibitions 
and seminars. Impact assessment of already 
commercialized technologies is also taken up for 
further improvement.
3.1 Intellectual Property Management
Institute Technology Management Unit (ITMU) 
takes care of the protection of intellectual 
property rights of the technologies developed in 
the Institute and evaluation of commercial values 
of different consultancy projects and also the 
licensing of technology.
During this period eleven consultancy projects 
have been evaluated and processed throughInstitute Technology Management Unit (ITMU) 
meetings and Institute Technology Management 
Committee (ITMC) meeting.
During this period, Four ITMU meetings and one 
Institute Technology Management Committee 
(ITMC) Meeting were conducted. The ITMC was 
held on 27t h  November 2020. The agenda of the 
meeting was discussion regarding creation of 
incubation facilities for Assessment of Indian 
Cotton Quality for Quality based trading of Cotton 
for better remuneration to Farmers. Different 
stakeholders are enquiring about facilities at 
CIRCOT for assessment of cotton quality for 
quality based trading of cotton for better 
remuneration to farmers. CIRCOT is working on 
cotton quality and trash level assessment and 
said fa cilitie s are NABL A ccredited. The 
committee suggested that a National Laboratory 
for Assessment of Trash and Contamination in 
Cotton (NLATCC) may be established at CIRCOT for 
reducing trash and contamination level in 
Indian cotton
A sponsored contract research proposal titled 
"Development of Standard Protocol for ensuring 
Transparency in Evaluation of Quality and Lot 
Wise Analysis of Cotton Fully Pressed (FP) Bales" 
to be sponsored by M/s. The Cotton Corporation 
of India Limited, Navi Mumbai was evaluated by 
the ITMU committee.
Consultancy  
Project NoTitle of ProjectName of Organisation to  
which Consultancy offered
CP2/2019-20 Cleaning & bleaching of LintersM/s Atul Limited, Valsad, 
Gujarat
CP10/2019-20Fabrication of Kenaf fibre reinforced polyester 
compositeM/s. VJTI, Mumbai
35

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Consultancy  
Project NoTitle of ProjectName of Organisation to  
which Consultancy offered
CP11/2019-20 Treatment of Silk fabricsM/s. Assam Agricultural 
University, Jorhat
CP12/2019-20 Treatment with ZnO on Cotton Fabrics M/s. Nirmala Niketan, Mumbai
CP13/2019-20Design and Manufacturing of Precleaner, Double 
roller gin, Bailing presses & Feeding systemM/s. Bajaj Steel Industries Ltd., 
Nagpur
CP01/2020-21Processing of bleached cotton linters for filter 
making applicationsM/s. Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. 
Ltd., Bengaluru
CP02/2020-21 Soft Silk Fabrics for Kawabata AnalysisM/s. Central Silk T echnological 
Research Institute, Bengaluru
CP04/2020-21Micro-Spinning of Cotton/Kapok Fibre blended 
yarns ratio of 82/20, 65/35 & 100% cottonM/s. CSUA&T, Kanpur, UP
CP05/2020-21Study spinning performance by blending of 
Kheemp fibre with cotton (ratio 80/20) on micro 
spinningDr Amit Vyas
CP03/2020-21 Silk Fabrics for Kawabata AnalysisM/s. Central Silk T echnological 
research Institute, Bengaluru
CP06/2020-21 Friction spinning of multifilament dyneema fiberM/s. MMP filtration Pvt. Ltd, 
Ahmedabad
Technology Incubation:3.2
Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) Centre
ICAR-CIRCOT has established an A gri­
Business Incubation (ABI) Centre under 12t h  
Plan Schem e of National A griculture 
Innovation Fund (NAIF) (Component II) 
-In c u b a tio n  Fund for the benefit of 
prospective entrepreneurs who wish to start 
their business using Institute technologies on 
post-harvest processing of cotton and value 
addition to its by-products. This centre 
p ro m o tes in c u b a tio n  and b u sin e ss 
development in cotton and its by-products, 
conducts techno-entrepreneurial activities in 
cotton value chain for building prospectiveclientele and facilitates skill development in 
selected stakeholders related to cotton 
sector. The Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) 
Centre was launched at ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai on 5th  February 2016. Since 
inception, sixteen incubatees joined this 
incubation centre for developing business 
enterprises among them seven incubatees 
successfully graduated from the incubator 
and started commercial ventures.
0  Two new entrepreneurs were admitted at 
ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI Centre for incubation on 
different technologies during the year 2020
36

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Sl. No. Incubatee Technology Technology Brief Photograph
1 M/s. Fumalabs 
Private Limited, 
GwaliorDevelopment 
of Particle 
Boards with 
innovative 
adhesiveIncubatee has started product 
development (beer holder) 
using bagasse and mustard 
LoI with the furniture company 
Featherlite for testing of boards 
LoI with a farmer's organization 
in Karnataka for supply of year- 
round bagasse and rice 
MoU with the University of 
Maine, US for R&D 
collaboration
Product Development & testing 
trial in progress at ICAR-CIRCOT 
for three layer particle boardsJ  -  f .
-  ' W  A \y ^  f - “
Logo
iM
f s W W M
C R A S T E
2 M/s. Navkruti 
Industries, SangliEco-friendly 
Dyeing & 
Finishing of 
Khadi and 
Handloom 
FabricInnovative textile finishing 
technology for cotton fabrics
Use of natural dyes as marigold, 
burnt coconut shell extract,
Can be carried out at room 
temperature,
Prevents high energy 
consumption,
Imparts anti-microbial and UV 
protective properties,
Absence of hazardous effluents.Logo
Navkruti
0  Two incubatees graduated from the incubation centre.
Name of Incubatee Technology
M/s. Kotak Commodities, 
MumbaiPreparation of Value Added Products using Naturally 
Coloured Cotton
M/s. Shree Agro Invent Tech 
Pvt. Ltd., MumbaiConceptualization, Design and development of technically 
Advanced Textile Materials and conversion to related 
Products
0  One new product developed by ICAR-CIRCOT- 
ABI Centre incubatee M/s. Shree Agro 
In vent Tech Pvt. Ltd ., M um bai was 
commercialized. The incubatee developed 
Cotton rich high comfort T-shirt with smart 
drying knitted fabric developed using ICAR- 
CIRCOT Technical Textile Technology and 
supplied product worth Rs. 110 lakhs to 
stakeholders.
0  Four specialized training programmes wereconducted during the year 2020 by ICAR- 
CIRCOT-ABI Centre.
0  On the occasion of 92n d  Foundation Day of 
ICAR on 16t h  July 2020, two technologies 
developed by ICAR-CIRCOT ABI Centre 
incubatees namely, 'Innovative Lysimeter for 
on-farm water management' and 'Cotton 
interlined sleeping bags for better comfort' 
were released by Hon'ble Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare Minister.
37

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
INCUBATEE: GREEN PROSPERITY INNOVATIONS SHREE AGRO INVENT-TECH PRIVATE LTD
Focus Area: Precision Farming Value addition to natural fibre
Name of 
Innovation:Lysimeter Based Water Management 
SystemCotton based Nanofinished Sleeping bags
Technology: Accurate Lysimeter based water 
management system for helping 
farmers to make decisions on 
irrigation time schedules. This device 
will be useful for determining highly 
accurate, ideally representative 
observations of evapotranspiration 
and amount of water leaching as well. 
It will also help in deciding quantity 
and timing of fertilizers and other 
irrigation-based inputs also. This 
system includes mobile phone based 
easy to use soft tools for farmers 
helping to make decisionsSleeping Bags with mosquito repulsive, 
antimicrobial finishing and high abrasive resistant 
outer layer of light weight Cotton/Polyester 
Blended fabric which uses recycled textile 
reinforcing material for cost effectiveness.
Unique Selling Proposition:
□ Inner layer of 100% cotton for better 
comfort and to avoid static charge 
generation.
□ High abrasive resistant, light weight outer 
layer of Polyester fabric
□ Anti-bacterial inner cotton layer to avoid 
odour generation due to sweating.
□ Sleeping Bag has pocket to place mosquito 
repellent pouch as well
Photographs□100% Made in India Product
0  Annual Review Workshop conducted for Agri 
Business Incubator and ITMUs under NAIF 
ZTMC Agri Engg. Institutes in Nov 2020 under 
chairmanship of Dr. K. Alagusundaram, DDG 
(Agril. Engg.) on 24t h  Nov. 2020.
RKVY RAFTAAR Agri Business Incubator  
(CIRCOT-R-ABI)
CIRCOT RKVY RAFTAAR Agri Business Incubator 
38(CIRCOT-R-ABI) was sanctioned by RKVY Division, 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India in 31s t January 
2019. This incubator is providing funding support 
as grant-in-aid by two programmes viz. Pre-seed 
stage funding upto Rs. 5 lakhs and Seed Stage 
Funding upto Rs. 25 lakhs. Under this programme, 
fourteen startups of the first cohort have received

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
grant-in-aid of Rs. 144.5 lakhs for converting their 
Minimum Viable Product into commercial scale 
products.
1. The 1s t Cohort of fourteen agripreneurs have 
developed innovative minimum viable 
products (MVP) and have received from 
RKVY-RAFTAAR Division of Rs. 144.5 lakhs in 
August 2020 for developing commercial 
scale products.
0  Uday: 4 agripreneurs0  Ankur: 10 agripreneurs
2. Fourteen MoUs signed with start-ups for 
disbursement of funds received from RKVY 
RAFTAAR Division, DAC&FW, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of 
India.
3. The 2n d  cohort of twenty four agripreneurs 
completed their Agripreneurship Orientation 
Programme (AOP) during 9th  October to 8t h  
December 2020.
Products Developed by ORCQT-R-ABI lncubatees ■ ■  Cohort
■  . in MU a. ail I'r
, , h M LC G fn *-  ‘ Ti-rrt
u w « u i  ft. h n  rn-c-n :* ■
M Y m . • Mu. k s r m  Mi w i j i - w i  h - r a w i i .
U.% K  H H r m u »  S a n  tm  * V '- U H  1. L .
II fe MIMlWnU
! ■  ■  . n ^  r,
4i;u r jl* m  - .n m a ,
|W
0  Uday: 4 agripreneurs
0  Ankur: 20 agripreneurs
4. Three Online Mentoring Sessions were 
organized to guide agripreneurs in product 
development, commercialization and scaling 
up: (05/11/2020, 06/11/2020; 11/11/2020)
5. Interaction with individual agri startups to 
monitor their progress: three times during 
AOP for each agri startups
6. Launch of CIRCOT-R-ABI M obile App:CIRCO T-R-A BI App was launched by 
Dr. K. Alagusundaram, DDG (Agril. Engg.),
39

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
3.3 Awareness Meets and Demonstrations
Awareness programme under Mera Gaon Mera 
Gaurav (MGMG) was organized at Shegaon kund, 
Hinganghat Dist- Wardha on 25t h  January 2020 in 
which 59 farmers participated.
39 farmers participated in Awareness programme 
under Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) at 
Waigaon, Dist- Wardha on 18t h  February 2020
Ginning Training Centre (GTC), ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Nagpur organised a Krishi Samvad at Dr. S. P . 
Roychoudhary Auditorium, ICAR-NBSS & LUP, 
Nagpur to commemorate the first World Cotton 
Day anniversary on Oct 07, 2020. About 75 
farmers from districts of Nagpur, Wardha and 
Yavatmal and a number of Scientific and Technical 
Officers of all 4 local ICAR institutes participated 
in the programme.
40A webinar was organised by Ginning Training 
Centre, ICAR-CIRCOT, Nagpur on Oct 15, 2020 in 
association with The Confederation of Indian 
Textile Industry-Cotton Development & Research 
Association (CITI-CDRA), Nagpur and Cotton 
Guru, Mumbai to assist the cotton farmers in 
realising MSP for sale of their produce. Prominent 
cotton professionals guided farmers through 
o n lin e le ctu res for m ain tain in g q u a lity 
parameters, proper harvesting and storage of 
cotton and avoiding adulteration of cotton with 
contaminants. The programme was also live 
stream ed on YouTube. Over 300 farm ers 
benefitted through this programme.
Awareness programme on "Clean Cotton Picking 
and Benefits of Maintaining Cleanliness in 
Surroundings" at Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav 
(MGMG) adopted village Ghorad, Taluka- Seloo, 
district Wardha was conducted on 18t h  Dec 2020 
wherein 25 farmers participated
Kisan Diwas was celebrated on 23r d  December 
2020 by conducting an awareness programme on 
"Maintaining Hygiene and Benefits of Clean 
Cotton Pickings" at village Akoli, Wardha. 
Participants: 75

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
3.4 Exhibitions and Agri-Fair
KRUSHIK 2020, a live demonstration & Agri Expo 
was organized by Agricultural Development Trust, 
Baramati and supported by ICAR and NABARD 
during 16t h  to 19th January 2020.
ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai participated in this 
exhibition and displayed technologies developed 
by the Institute. This mega event took place in 
Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Baramati. Around 450 
exhibitors demonstrated their technologies in the 
area spread over 110 acres. As per organizers 
around 3 lakh visitors visited the expo in the span 
of 4 days. Visitors from other cities and states, 
farmers, students and many women self-help 
groups visited the ICAR-CIRCOT stall. Visitors were 
briefed about schemes under Agri Business 
Incubation (ABI) and RAFTAAR -  ABI and 
entrepreneurs were urged to come up with 
innovative ideas to avail the facilities provided by 
the Government of India.3.5 Television Talks
Phone in Live interview of Dr. P . G. Patil, Director, 
ICAR-CIRCOT on % <w h " (Post­
Harvest Technologies of Cotton) was telecast on 
24t h  September 2020 on Sahyadri channel in 
Krishidarshan programme where in he answered 
direct questions from the farmers and other 
stakeholders.
3.6 Inauguration of National Laboratory  
for Advanced Material Characterization  
(NLAMC):
•  The National Laboratory for Advanced 
Material Characterization (NLAMC) was 
inaugurated by the august hands of Dr. K. 
Alagusundaram, DDG (Agril. Engg.) on 3r d  
December 2020
•  This lab has been established with the financial 
support from ICAR-National Agricultural 
Innovation Fund (NAIF), ICAR-Scheduled Caste 
Sub Plan (SCSP) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana -  Renumerative Approaches for 
Agriculture and Allied Sectors Rejuvenation 
(RKVY-RAFTAAR) Schem e, M inistry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW) 
New Delhi and Extramural Fund of ICAR
41

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
4. SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING
Skill development and capacity building are very 
important for every organisation to maintain the 
q u ality of the w ork with the dedicated 
involvement of the employees. The skill of the 
work force needs to be upgraded in their 
respective fields with latest developments so as 
to enable them to provide maximum output for 
the organization.
Skill development in the area of post-harvest 
processing of cotton and value addition to its 
biomass is one of the mandate of the Institute. 
Training programmes are organised by the 
institute for the stakeholders including farmers, 
ginners, personnel from cotton trade and industry 
throughout the year. These trainings covers 
diverse areas of cotton processing.
Ginning Training Centre (GTC) of the Institute at 
Nagpur regularly conducts training for the 
farmers covering production and post-harvest 
processing of cotton and utilisation of cotton 
biomass for value added products. Training 
courses for Gin fitters and other workers in the 
ginning industry on technologies for production 
of clean quality cotton, maintenance of various 
ginning and allied machines are also organized 
regularly by GTC.
The institute also organises specialised training 
programmes on spinning, quality evaluation, 
K n it t in g , m a te r ia l c h a r a c t e r is a t io n , 
nanotechnology, microscopy, electrospinning, 
absorbent cotton technology, com posite 
materials, value addition to cottonseeds etc. for 
the personnel from the academia, industry and 
entrepreneurs.
424.1 Capacity building of Staff
Institute staff are trained as per the training needs 
assessment plan for the year 2019-2020, to keep 
pace with the latest technological advancements 
in the relevant fields. The employees were trained 
in premier institutions to learn the cutting-edge 
te ch n o lo g ie s, and p ro ject m anagem ent 
m etho d o lo gie s. Im p act a sse ssment o f th e 
training programme are also carried out after a 
period of one year to analyse the outcome. The 
percent realization of trainings planned during 
the financial year 2019-20 was 81.48%. Scientists 
underwent training in diversified fields like 
advances in scientific communication, food 
p ro c e ssin g , m an agem en t d e ve lo p m e n t 
programme and NABL training. Technical staff 
underwent training in the area of skill & 
personality development, motivation, positive 
thinking, E-Office, development of institutional 
rep o sito rie s, and Instrum ental an alysis. 
Administrative staff were trained in Personality 
development, behavioural skills, administration 
and finance. Supporting staff underwent training 
on skill development. For the current year (2019­
20), all the staff are enthusiastically participating 
in the various training programmes as per the 
designed annual training plan.
Orientation training of newly joined ARS 
probationers Dr. Kanika Sharma and Shri 
Himanshushekhar Chourasia was organised 
during 8th  June - 7th  July which was co-ordinated 
by Dr. Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist & 
Head I/c, CBPD.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Table 4.1 Skill development of Institute Staff
Programme Title Duration Venue Name(s)
Scientific Staff
Training programme on "SciCom for 
Smart Scientists"January 16-22, 
2020ICAR-Central Institute 
of Fisheries Education, 
MumbaiDr. C. Sundaramoorthy 
Dr. T. Senthilkumar 
Dr. G. Krishna Prasad
Training on Fundamentals of TOC & 
Operational SoftwareFebruary 13-14, 
2020M/s Shimadzu 
Analytical (I), Pvt. Ltd.Dr. A. S. M. Raja
Online training programme on 
"SciCom for Smart Scientists"May 12-25, 2020 Organized by ICAR- 
CIFE, MumbaiDr. N. Vigneshwaran, 
Dr. Kanika Sharma
One-week online training course 
"Smart Handling and Processing 
Systems of Horticultural Produce"May 09-14, 2020 Organized by MPKV 
Rahuri (Maharashtra).Dr. M. K. Mahawar 
Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar
One-week online training course on 
"Role of technologies and 
automation in food processing and 
preservation"May 14-19, 2020 Organized by 
Vasantrao Naik 
Marathwada Krishi 
Vidyapeeth (VNMKV), 
Parbhani, MaharashtraDr. Sharmila Patil 
Dr. M. K. Mahawar 
Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar
ISAE Webinar training series-2 :  
Automation in Agriculture" Second 
webinar seriesMay 20-26, 2020 ISAE, New Delhi Shri GTV Prabu
Advances in smart Food Processing 
TechnologiesJune 04-15, 2020 Organized by MPKV 
Rahuri, MaharashtraDr.Manoj Kumar Mahawar
Management Development 
Program (MDP) on Priority Setting, 
Monitoring and Evaluation (PME) 
of Agricultural Research ProjectsOctober 12-17, 
2020Organized by ICAR- 
NAARM, Hyderabad 
online modeDr. A S M  Raja
Training on science administration 
and research managementNovember 04-17, 
2020Organized by ASCI, 
HyderabadDr.P.S.Deshmuk
Online nanotechnology Training 
2020November 23-27, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Dr. Kanika Sharma
Training programme on Laboratory 
Management System and Internal 
audit as per ISO17025:2017November 24-27, 
2020Organized by IRMRA, 
MumbaiDr. A S M  Raja
Specialized training programme on 
improving Work efficiency, Stress 
Management and Personality 
DevelopmentDecember 07, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Dr. S. K. Shukla 
Dr. P . K. Mandhyan
Technical Staff
E-office Training January 09-10, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Shri. K. Narayanan
Training on "Dspace Software for 
Design and Development of 
Institutional Repositories- 
Advance"January 20-24, 
2020CSIR-NISCAIR, New 
DelhiMrs. P . S. Nirhali 
Mrs. P . R. Mhatre
43

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Programme Title Duration Venue Name(s)
Repair & Maintenance of office 
residential building including guest 
houseJanuary 21-23, 
2020ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal Shri.T.Venugopal
Training on Fundamentals of TOC & 
Operational SoftwareFebruary 13-14, 
2020M/s Shimadzu 
Analytical (I), Pvt. Ltd.Dr Sujata R. Kawlekar, 
Shri R.S. Narkar
One day specialized training 
programme on improving Work 
efficiency, Stress Management and 
Personality DevelopmentDecember 07, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Shri D. U. Patil 
Dr. Sheela Raj 
Shri. K. Thiagarajan 
Shri U. D. Devikar 
Shri. S. L. Bhanuse 
Shri S. N. Hedau 
Shri K. Narayanan 
Shri R. G. Dhakate 
Shri D. U. Kamble 
Dr. Jal Singh 
Shri M. B. Patel 
Smt. Binu Sunil 
Shri D. M. Correia 
Shri M. M. Kadam 
Shri Umrao Meena
Administrative Staff
Training on Establishing matters of 
LDC & UDCJanuary 04-09, 
2020ICAR-CIFE, Mumbai Mrs. Vijaya Nitin Walzade
E-office Training January 09-10, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Shri. Sunil Kumar 
Shri.S.V.Kasabe 
Shri.Y .R.Pathare 
Shri.K.Parleshwar 
Smt.Pooja Tiwari 
Miss. Himani Singh 
Shri.Avinash Aman
Training Programme on "Enhancing 
Efficiency and behavioural skills of 
Stenographer grade III, PA, PS and 
PPS of ICAR Institutes /HQSFebruary 24-29, 
2020ICAR-NAARM,
HyderabadSmt.R.R.Tawade
Shri.R.D.Shambharkar
Training session through a webinar 
with Knowledge partners and R-ABI 
from 29 institutions for discussions 
on various issues related to 
operation of PFMS/ EAT module of 
PFMSOctober 15, 2020 Shri.S.V.Kasabe 
Miss.Himani Singh 
Shri.T .D.Dhamange 
Shri.Hemant Ladgacutar
One day specialized training 
programme on improving Work 
efficiency, Stress Management and 
Personality DevelopmentDecember 07, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Shri K. Parleshwar 
Shri. R. G. Matel 
Smt. V. R. Naik
Online Training Programme for 
Administrative & Finance OfficerNovember 23-27, 
2020ICAR-NAARM,
HyderabadShri.M.Radhakrishnan
Shri.S.A.Telpande
Shri.S.D.Ambolkar
44

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Skilled Support staff
Programme Title Duration Venue Name(s)
One day specialized training 
programme on improving Work 
efficiency, Stress Management and 
Personality DevelopmentDecember 07, 
2020ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai Shri R. B. Kautkar 
Shri D. G. Gole 
Shri A. F . Gudadur 
Shri V . Subbaiah 
Shri R. S. Umare 
Shri M. M. Bhandakkar
4.2 HRD Achievements
Table 4.2.1 HRD Targets & Achievements for April 2019 to March 2020
Category Total No. o f  
EmployeesNo. o f trainings  
planned fo r each  
category during 2019­
20 as per ATPNo. o f employees  
undergone training  
during April 2019 to  
M arch 2020% realization o f  
trainings planned  
during 2019-20
Scientist 26 8 7 87.5
Technical 64 7 5 71.43
Administrative & 
Finance32 6 11 183.33
SSS 36 6 0 0.00
Total 158 27 22 81.48
Table 4.2.2 HRD Targets & Achievements for April 2020 to December 2020
Category Total No. o f  
EmployeesNo. o f trainings  
planned fo r each  
category during 2020­
21 as per A TPNo. o f employees  
undergone training  
during April-Dec 2020% realization  
o f trainings  
during 2020­
21
Scientist 28 10 13 130.00
Technical 62 19 20 105.26
Administrative & 
Finance29 13 16 123.07
SSS 33 12 6 50.00
Total 152 54 55 101.85
4.3 Trainings organised to stakeholders
The Institute has been conducting regular training 
p ro g r a m m e s  fo r s t u d e n t s , f a r m e r s , 
entrepreneurs and personnel employed in cotton 
and ginning sectors. Training programmes related 
to advances in cotton technology in the field of 
composite materials, Nano-technology, spinning,q uality evaluation and use of advanced 
instrumentation are conducted at Mumbai 
headquarters. At Ginning Training Centre, 
Nagpur, training programmes on cotton grading 
and procurem ent, double roller ginning 
technology are organised.
45

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
T able 4.3 Training Programmes organised during 2020
National
Programme Title Duration No. of Participants' Profile
Participants
ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai
Composite Technology February 12-14, 2020 05 Students, Academic, 
Industry, ICAR
Quality Evaluation of Cotton for Cotton 
GradersJune 01-05, 2020 05 Agricultural Officers
Nanotechnology Training (online) November 23-27, 2020 24 Students, Academics, 
ICAR
One day specialized training programme on 
improving Work efficiency, Stress 
Management and Personality DevelopmentDecember 07, 2020 26 ICAR-CIRCOT Employees
GTC of ICAR-CIRCOT, Nagpur
Double Roller Ginning Technology and Basics 
of Cotton GradingJanuary 13-18, 2020 03 Ginners
Cotton Production and Post-harvest 
ProcessingFebruary 03-06, 2020 20 Farmers
Double Roller Ginning Technology and Basics 
of Cotton GradingFebruary 10-15, 2020 01 Ginners
Cotton Grading and Procurement May 11-14, 2020 29 Agricultural Officers
Cotton Grading and Procurement May 15-18, 2020 32Agricultural Officers
Cotton Grading and Procurement May 20-23, 2020 33Agricultural Officers
Cotton Grading and Procurement June 01-05,2020 06Agricultural Officers
Double Roller Ginning Technology and Basics 
of Cotton GradingOctober 26-30, 2020 08 Ginners
Total number of training  
programmesNumber of beneficiaries Revenue generated  
(Rs. Lakhs)
11 166 16.94
Besides, an A grip reneursh ip  orientation 
Programme (AOP) was organised during 9thOctober - 8t h  December 2020 for 24 Agripreneurs 
by CIRCOT R-ABI .
46

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
4.4 Education
The U niversity of Mumbai has accorded 
permanent recognition to ICAR-CIRCOT for 
guiding students leading to M.Sc . (by research) in
Ph.D. Students on rollsubjects: Physics, Bio-physics, Microbiology and 
Organic Chemistry and Ph.D . in Physics and 
Microbiology.
Name of Students  
(Research Guide)Year of  
AdmissionResearch Topic Status
Mrs. Sangeeta M . Chavan 
(Dr. N . Vigneshwaran)2012 Effect of silver, zinc oxide and titania 
nanoparticles on nitrogen fixing, 
phosphate solubilizing and biofilm 
forming bacteria found in soil 
ecosystems.Synopsis
submitted.
Ms. Komal Saraf 
(Dr. N . Vigneshwaran)2012 Preparation of nanofibre mats of 
alginate and pullulan by electro spinning 
and its application as nanosensor for 
detection of food spoilageOn-going
Ms. Priyanka Bagde 
(Dr. N . Vigneshwaran)2014 Immobilization of antimicrobial 
peptides on nanocellulose for potential 
use in active food packagingDegree 
awarded on 
16t h  March 
2020.
ICAR-CIRCOT has signed MoUs with educational 
institutions to promote research and teaching in 
the sphere of cotton science and technology. The 
MoU helps in carrying out joint research work & 
creates an opportunity for perusing post graduate 
& Doctoral degree programmes. ICAR-CIRCOT has 
signed MoU with fo llo w in g educatio n al 
institutions.
1. VJTI, Mumbai.
2. Dr. BSKKV, Dapoli.
3. UAS, Dharwad
4. SNDT, Mumbai
5. ICT, MumbaiIn addition, to promote the quality post 
graduate research and training in cutting edge 
areas, ICAR-CIRCOT facilitate students from NARS 
and other organizations to access specialized 
g u id a n c e  an d  f a c i l i t i e s  as p e r th e  
ICAR's Guidelines for the students to conduct  
research fo r their degree programmes as  
trainees at ICAR institutions.
Institute scientists also deliver guest lectures to 
students of various textile related institutes on 
topics related to Cotton technology. Dr. Sujata 
Saxena, Principal Scientist and Head I/c, CBPD 
conducted a virtual expert session for students of 
National Institute of Fashion Technology, Mumbai 
on Natural dyes on 23r d October, 2020.
47

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
5. Linkages and Collaboration
ICAR-CIRCOT has a very important policy of 
maintaining linkages with various organizations at 
national and international level in the domain of 
research, education, skill development and 
extension. These linkages with stakeholders helps 
to fo ster research, enhance tech no lo gy 
assessment and refinement, capacity building 
and eases the transfer of technology from lab to 
the land.
ICAR-CIRCOT continues to be a technology 
partner for the AICRP on Cotton and Principal 
investigator of Quality Research. The institute is 
linked to ICAR institutions and State Agricultural 
University involved in the cotton breeding 
programmes. The institute is also a part of the 
Central Variety Release Committee and the 
cotton varieties release should fulfil the CIRCOT 
quality norms.
The Institute's initiative to include industrial 
stakeholders at the project initiation stage has led 
to development of linkage with industrial 
stakeholders through signing of Memorandum of 
U n d e rsta n d in g  (M oU ) for c a rry in g  out 
c o lla b o ra tiv e  re se arch  and m a ch in e ry  
development in public private partnership mode. 
The a sso c ia tio n  w ith the in s titu tio n a l 
stakeholders like Cotton Corporation of India 
(CCI) has also been strengthened to work in 
participatory mode for technology development.
Th e In s titu te  is th e no dal c e n tre  fo r 
implementation of the Consortia Research 
Platform (CRP) on Natural Fibres. Under this 
project the linkage has been established with 
institutes working in the field of natural fibres 
such as ICAR-NINFET, Kolkata, Assam Agricultural 
University, Jorhat, TNAU, Coimbatore and ICAR- 
CSWRI, Avikanagar.
The Regional Quality Evaluation (QE) units of the 
institute are located within the premises of other
48ICAR institutes and agricultural universities in the 
country. The main functioning of these units is as 
extension wings of the Institute. In addition to 
this, these units also facilitate linkages and 
collaboration with the host institutes.
Agri-Business Incubation (ABI) Centre and R-ABI 
of the Institute work towards promotion of 
entrepreneurship based on institute technologies 
as well as agricu ltu re and allied  sector 
innovations. These incubation centres have 
mentored budding agripreneurs for innovative 
product development, guided them in product 
refinement as per market needs, facilitated 
funding for product upscaling and establish 
successful ventures for com m ercial scale 
production. They have created linkages with 
budding entrepreneurs, industries and other 
institutions working towards transformation of 
innovative ideas into new enterprises.
International collaboration with the stakeholders 
of the cotton sector in the African Countries was 
also created by the Institute. A partnership has 
been established with the United National 
C o n ference on Trade and D evelopm ent 
(UNCTAD), Geneva for promoting cotton by­
products in Eastern and Southern Africa 
especially in Zambia, Zimbabwe, Tanzania and 
Uganda. In the process the linkage was also 
established with International Trade Centre (ITC) 
and COMESA.
Memoranda of understanding (MoUs) were 
signed for development / commercialization of 
Institute technologies for cotton processing and 
value addition to by-products with different 
institutions, industries and individuals.
Institute also participates regularly in the Round 
Robin tests for evaluation of cotton fibre quality 
conducted by Bremen Institute and USDA. Since 
past 4 years it is also prticipating in the inter-lab

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Round test for stickiness measuring methods
conducted by International Cotton Committee
on Testing Methods of the International Textile
Manufacturers federation (ICCTM-ITMF).
5.1 MoU Signed
Research Collaboration
1. ICAR-CIRCOT signed a MoU with Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai on 
29t h  October 2020 to boost the collaborative 
research in Q u ality Im provem ent of 
Cotton Cellulosic Biopolymer by Gamma 
Irradiation for their use in Medical and 
Food Industries.
Technology Incubation
2. MoU with Incubatee M/s. Fumalabs Private 
Lim ited, G w alior for Developm ent of 
Particle Boards with innovative adhesive.
3. Fourteen Memorandum of Agreements 
(MoAs) were signed by CIROT-R-ABI with 
startups and agri-preneurs for Pre-Seed 
and Seed Stage Funding as Grant-in-aid 
under RKVY RAFTAAR Scheme of DAC&FW, 
MOA&FW, New Delhi, Govt. of India. These 
fourteen startups have received total 
funding support of Rs. 144.5 lakh under 
this scheme.T echnology Commercialization
4. MoU signed with M/s. Bajaj Steel Industries 
Ltd, Nagpur on 31s t  July 2020 for the licensing 
of technology titled 'Gin Trash Handling 
System to Destroy Pink bollworm from 
Cotton Ginneries" for commercial scale 
production and marketing.
5.2 Commercial Testing Services
CIRCOT is an acclaimed NABL accredited cotton 
testing laboratory in India. The Institute has 
facilities for conducting more than 190 tests on 
different textile m aterials and cotton by­
products. These facilities are extended to various 
stakeholders. Besides regular tests, special tests 
were also carried out as per demand on samples 
received from various government/ private 
organisations and universities.
During the year 2020, a total number of 42722 
samples were tested at headquarters at Mumbai, 
GTC Nagpur and quality evaluation units at 
Coimbatore, Dharwad, Guntur, Sirsa and Surat. 
Total revenue generated through commercial 
testing during the year 2020 was '  27580703 /-.
The Institute maintains liaison with different 
institutions including private organizations and 
entrepreneurs and strives to meet their 
technological needs by offering various other 
need based services and generates additional 
revenue through the activity.
T a b le  5 .1  N u m b e r  o f P a id  S a m p le s  T e s t e d  a n d  R e v e n u e  G e n e r a t e d
T  e st C e n tre N o . o f S a m p le s  T  e ste d R e v e n u e  G e n e ra te d  (R s)
Mumbai 4656 3333231
Nagpur 31136 21568426
Coimbatore 5521 1484388
Dharwad -- 14396
Guntur 268 26904
Sirsa 872 1128649
Surat 269 24709
T o t a l 4 2 7 2 2 2 7 5 8 0 7 0 3
49

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
T able 5.2 T ests Conducted and Clientele
Test clients
AAS ICAR-Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar
AFMCentral Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Saharanpur U.P. 
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engg.&Tech, Kolkata
Anti-bacterial Activity Director, MGIRI, Wardha
BET Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
V.J.T.I., Mumbai
Ultrafine Products Pvt. Ltd., Dombivali 
Naari Pharma Pvt. Ltd., Pantnagar 
V. G. Vaze College, Mumbai
Bandage Testing Medii Heal Solutions, Nagpur
FTIR Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Saharanpur U.P.
Free Gossypol Noveltech Feeds Pvt. Ltd., Worli, Mumbai
Instron European T extile Chemical Corporation, Hosur, T.N.
Dept of Clothing & Textiles, College of Home Science, Pantnagar
Kawabata ICAR-Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar 
Grasim Industries Limited, Navi Mumbai
Paper testing Shivaji University, Kolhapur 
Mumbai University Press, Mumbai
Particle size Analysis Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Saharanpur U.P. 
Watson Pharma Pvt Limited, Mumbai
SEM Bharati Vidyapeeth College, CBD Belapur 
TUV SUD South Asia Pvt. Ltd.
Watson Pharma Pvt Limited
V.J.T.I., Mumbai
NMIMS SPPSPTM, Vile Parle
Rubicon Research Pvt. Ltd., Ambernath
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engg.&Tech, Kolkata
Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai
Indoco Remedies Limited, Navi Mumbai
Gangwal Chemicals Pvt. Ltd., Thane
Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Saharanpur U.P.
Shear Strength Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai
Total Gossypol Noveltech Feeds Pvt. Ltd., Worli, Mumbai
Chhattisgarh State Co-Op. Marketing Federation Ltd., Durg
TOC Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai
UPF J. D . Birla College, Kalyan
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engg.&Tech, Kolkata
50

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
5.3 Linkage with BIS
Director and scientists of the institute have been 
contributing to the development and review of 
the test methods & standards in the field 
oftextiles as members/chairman in various 
committees of the Bureau of Indian Standards(BIS). During the year 2020, membership of the 
institute scientists to various BIS committees is 
listed below. D r. Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist, 
has been nominated by BIS to be a member of the TC 
38 (Textiles) Committee of the ISO.
BIS Committee Name Name of Member & Designation Role
Physical Methods of Test 
(TXD 01)Dr P G Pati'l, Director Chairman
Dr Pradeep Mandhyan, Principal Scientist Principal
Dr T Senthilkumar, Scientist Alternate
Chemical Methods of Test 
(TXD 05)Dr Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist Principal
Dr A S M  Raja, Principal Scientist Alternate
Textiles Speciality Chemicals & Dyestuffs 
(TXD 07)Dr (Smt.) Sujata Saxena , Principal Scientist Principal
Dr A S M  Raja, Principal Scientist Alternate
Textile Machinery and Accessories 
(TXD 14)Dr V G Arude, Senior Scientist Principal
Dr T Senthil Kumar, Scientist Alternate
Man-made Fibres, Cotton and their Products 
(TXD 31)Dr P K Mandhyan, Principal Scientist Principal
Dr A Arputharaj, Scientist Alternate
Technical Textiles for Agrotech Applica tions 
(TXD 35)Dr N  Vigneshwaran, Principal Scientist Principal
Dr P K Mandhyan, Principal Scien tist Alternate
Technical Tex tiles for Sportech Applica tions 
(TXD 37)Dr A Arputharaj, Scien tist Principal
Dr P K Mandhyan, Principal Scien tist Alternate
Technical Tex tiles for Mobiltech Applica tions 
(TXD 38)Dr G Krishna Prasad, Scien tist Principal
Dr A Arputharaj, Scientist Alternate
Technical Tex tiles for Clothtech Applica tions 
including Narrow Fabrics and Braids
(TXD 39)Dr P Jagajanantha, Scien tist Principal
Dr T Senthilkumar, Scien tist Alternate
Composites and Speciality Fibres 
(TXD 40)Dr. Ashok Kumar Bharimalla, Sr. Scien tist Principal
Dr P Jagajanantha, Scien tist Alternate
51

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
BIS Committee Name Name of Member & Designation Role
Textiles Division Council 
(TXDC)Dr P G Pati'l, Director Principal
Dr P K Mandhyan, Principal Scientist Alternate
Four new BIS standards IS 17430, IS 17431, IS 
17432 and IS 17433 on identification of natural 
dyes Canna flowers, Balsam flowers, Tectonaleaves and Arjun bark respectively were 
published in 2020 through TXD 07 committee 
wherein institute provided valuable inputs.
5.4 Linkages with Institutions through consultancy projects
VJTI, Mumbai, Maharashtra
Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam
M/s Atul Limited, Valsad, Gujrat
Nirmala Niketan, New Marine Lines,
Mumbai
Bajaj Steel Industries Ltd., Nagpur, 
Maharashtra
M/s. Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd.,
Bengaluru, Karnataka
Central Silk Board, Bengaluru, KarnatakaCSUA&T, Kanpur, UP
M/s. MMP filtration Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat
M/s. Amarnaatth Engineering, Coimbatore, 
Tamil Nadu
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, 
Coimbatore
M/s. Bajaj Steel Industries Limited, Nagpur 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
M/s. Fumalabs Private Limited, Gwalior, MP
5.5 Innovation Excellence Indicator
Institute participated in the excercise to 
determine Innovation Excellence Indicators for 
public funded R&D organisations initiated by 
the Office of the Principal Scientific Advisor toGOI under 'Applied reserach' and 'Services and 
research' categories. Dr. Sujata Saxena, 
Principal Scientist and Head I/c, CBPD was nodal 
officer for this exercise.
52

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
6. AWARDS AND RECOGNITION
Sardar Patel Outstanding ICAR institution Award 2019
During the occasion of 92nd Foundation Day and 
Award Ceremony of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) held on 16t h  July, 
2020 thro u gh  V ideo C o n fe re n cin g , the 
prestigious Sardar Patel Outstanding ICAR 
Institution Award for the year 2019 was conferred 
upon ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai. The award carries a 
cash prize of Rs. 10 Lakhs, award citation and 
ce rtifica te . The award is for sig n ifica n t 
contribution of ICAR-CIRCOT towards the 
re se a rch  and d e v e lo p m e n t of v a rio u s 
technologies in the field of Post-Harvest 
Processing and Value Addition to Cotton and 
Utilization of its By-Products. The institute has 
commercialized various developed technologies 
through incubation, promotion of start-ups, skilldevelopment and entrepreneurship 
development programmes and offered prompt 
commercial testing services to stakeholders.
Dr. P.G. Patil, Director of the institute received the 
award virtually from Shri Narendra Singh Tomar, 
Hon'ble Union Minister for Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, Government of India. Dr. P . G. Patil 
congratulated all the staff members of CIRCOT for 
their untiring work which led to bagging the 
award.
During the occasion two technologies developed 
by the institute through incubation centre namely 
innovative Lysimeter for on-farm water 
management and Cotton interlined sleeping bags 
for better comfort were also released.
ISAE Team Award-2019 for remarkable research work
A team of ICAR - CIRCOT Scientists comprising of 
Dr. P . G. Patil, Director of the institute and Dr. S. K. 
Shukla, Dr. V. G. Arude, Dr. V. Mageshwaran, Dr. C. 
Sundaramoorthy, Dr. P . S. Deshmukh and Dr. A. K. 
Bharimalla has been bestowed with ISAE Team 
Award-2019 for their remarkable research work 
for the project 'Utilization of Ligno-CellulosicFibre Based Biomass as Renewable Energy for 
Rural and Industrial Applications' carried out 
under Consortia Research Platform (CRP) Project 
on Natural Fibres. The award was conferred upon 
the scientist during 54t h  ISAE Convention and 
International Symposium held at Pune on 7t h  
January, 2020
53

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Jawaharlal Nehru Award
Dr. Ashok Kumar Bharimalla, Senior Scientist 
of the Institute has been awarded Jawaharlal 
Nehru Award for P.G. Outstanding Doctoral 
Thesis Research in Agricultural and Allied 
Sciences 2019 in the category of Agricultural 
Engineering for his thesis on "Preparation of 
Nanocellulose by Chemo-Mechanical Process and 
its Application to Improve Mechanical Properties 
of Kraft Paper".Young Scientist Award
Dr. Manoj Mahawar, Scientist received Young 
Scientist Award from VDGOOD Professional 
Association, Tamil Nadu.
Best Start up Award 2020
ICAR-CIRCOT-RKVY-RAFTAAR incubate Shri K. K. 
Anand (Rubber Engineers Enterprise) received 
the Best Start-up award 2020 by KRISHIK, An 
incubator of UAS, Dharwad on 25 * h  February 2020.
Natural Fibre Reinforced 
Rubber Pots
54

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Best Paper Award
•  A rticle  e n title d , 'N a n o te ch n o lo g ica l 
approaches for synthesis of Sulphur 
nanoparticles' authored by Bharimalla, A. K, 
Patil, P . G, Palkar, J and Mahawar M. K was 
awarded with Best Article Award by the 
Agriculture & Food: E-Newsletter magazine 
(ISSN: 2581 8317).
•  Dr. P . Jagajanantha, scientist received the 
Best Paper award for the paper entitled "Heat 
Generating Smart Garment using Conductive 
Yarn" presented in International Virtual 
Conference on Applied Science, Technology 
M anagem ent And Language Stu d ie s(ASTMLS) organised by Sona College of 
Technology, Salem on 11t h  & 12t h  December, 
2020.
•  Manoj Kumar and Charanjit Kaur "Optimizing 
the extraction process of natural antioxidants 
from punica granatum peel using microwave- 
assisted extractio n: a value addition 
approach" presented by Dr. Manoj Kumar in 
the National seminar on Smart Horticulture at 
Jhalawar, Rajasthan on 30t h  January 2020. 
Received first place in oral presentation.
Lead / Invited Presentations
Topic Event / Organizer / Venue Delivered by
Invited Paper "Business 
Perspective and 
Entrepreneurship Opportunities 
in Cotton Stalk By-product Based 
Industry in India""Cotton Production Technologies in next 
decade: Problems & Perspectives" held at 
OUAT, Bhubaneswar during 22-24 January, 
2020Dr. V. G. Arude
invited paper titled 'Cotton 
based Medical Textiles'Sem inar on Business Opportunities in 
Medical Textiles organized by South Gujarat 
Productivity Council, Surat, Gujarat on 17th  
February, 2020T. Senthilkumar
Invited Lecture National Conference on Omics for Food, 
Health and Environment (OFHE-2020) held at 
DDU Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur 
during 14-15 February 2020Dr. K. Pandiyan
Invited Lecture "Role of Agri­
Business Centre in 
Entrepreneurship Development: 
A Case of ICAR-CIRCOT"21 days National Innovative Training 
Programme (NITP-2020) on "Recent 
Technologies for Agribusiness M anagement 
and AGri-Entrepreneurship" organised by 
NADCL, J&K and Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia 
Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, MP on27th  October 
2020Dr. C. Sudaram oorthy
55

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
7 .  PUBLICATIONS
7.1 Research papers
1. Kumar, Manoj, Dahuja, Anil (2019) Cellulase 
enhances anthocyanin and phenolic content 
in black carrot juice, Indian Journal of 
Horticulture, 76 (4), pp. 749-751 (NAAS rating 
6.11)
2. Chavan, S, Sarangdhar, V, Vigneshwaran, N  
(2020) To xico lo gical effects of TiO 2 
nanoparticles on plant growth promoting soil 
bacteria, Emerging Contaminants, 6, pp. 87­
92
3. Arude, V. G, Deshmukh, S. P , Shukla, S. K, Patil, 
P . G (2020) Assessment of strength of 
attachment of cotton fibre to seed, Journal of 
Cotton Research and Development, 34 (1), 
pp. 1-9 (NAAS rating 4.69)
4. Sardar, A sh tash ila, Satankar, Varsha, 
Jagajanantha, P . and Mageshwaran, V. (2020) 
Effect of substrates (cotton stalks and cotton 
seed hulls) on growth, yield and nutritional 
composition of two oyster mushrooms 
(Pleurotus ostreatus and Pleurotus florida), 
J o u r n a l o f C o tto n  R e s e a r c h  and 
Development, 34 (1) 135-145. (NAAS rating 
4.69)
5. Jalgaonkar, K, Mahawar, M. K, Bibwe, B, 
Kannaujia, P (2020) Postharvest Profile, 
Processing and Waste Utilization of Dragon 
Fruit (Hylocereus Spp.): A Review, Food 
R e v i e w s  I n t e r n a t i o n a l .  D O I:  
10.1080/87559129.2020.1742152 (NAAS 
rating 9.93).
6. Prabu, G. T. V, Dhurai, Bharathi (2020) A Novel 
Profiled Multi-Pin Electrospinning System for 
Nanofiber Production and Encapsulation of 
Nanoparticles into Nanofibers, Scientific 
Reports, 10:4302 (NAAS rating 10.01)
567. Prabu, G. T. V, Dhurai, Bhaarathi, Saxena, 
Ayush (2020) Influence of high voltage 
polarity in multi-pin upward electrospinning 
system on the Fibremorphology of poly (vinyl 
alcohol), Journal of Polymer Research, 
3/2020.
8. Mahawar, M. K, Jalgaonkar, K, Bibwe, B (2020) 
Development of composite mechanical 
peeler cum juice extractor for kinnow and 
sweet orange, Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 57, pp. 4355-4363 (NAAS rating 
7.85)
9. Arude, V. G, Deshmukh, S. P , Patil, P . G, Shukla, 
S. K (2020) Single Locking Cotton Feeder for 
Enhancing Ginning Efficiency of Double Roller 
Gin, Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, 
Africa and Latin America (AMA), 51 (1), pp. 
24-28 (NAAS rating 6.15)
10. Arude, V. G, Deshmukh, S. P , Patil, P . G, Shukla, 
S. K (2020) Influence of single locking of 
cotton bolls on ginning performance of 
double roller gin for short staple cotton, 
J o u r n a l o f C o t t o n  R e s e a r c h  and 
Development, 34 (2), pp. 278-290 (NAAS 
rating 4.69)
11. Krishna Prasad, G, Senthilkumar, T, Raja, A. S. 
M, Patil, P . G, Ashtaputre, Nandita M, 
Vigneshwaran, N  (2020) Cotton Based 
Bioactive Wound Dressing Material with High 
Absorbency and Antibacterial Activity, Indian 
Journal of Fiber & Textile Research. (NAAS 
rating 6.51)
12. Kumar, V, Patil, P . G, Sundaramoorthy, C 
(2018) Cotton and Man-made Textile sector 
in India — A Curtain Raiser and Relevant 
Environm ent Issues, Cotton Research 
Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 1-7 (NAAS rating 3.45)

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
13. Patil, P . G, Mandhyan, P . K, Sundaramoorthy, 
C, Arputharaj, A (2018) Challenges in Asian 
C o tto n  F ib re  Q u a lit y  and F u tu re  
Requirement, Cotton Research Journal, 9 (1 ), 
pp. 8-13 (NAAS rating 3.45)
14. Shaikh, A. J, Patil, P. G, Shukla, S. K, 
Mageshwaran, V, Ambare, M. G (2018) 
Supply Chain and Value Addition of Cotton 
Byproducts in Asia, Cotton Research Journal, 
9 (1 ), pp. 14-19 (NAAS rating 3.45)
15. Ghadge, S. V, Shukla, S. K, Satankar, Varsha, 
Patil, D. U, Shirsath, B. V (2018) Performance 
Evaluation of Bajaj Boll Opener for Cleaning 
and Opening of kawdi Cotton in Ginneries, 
Cotton Research Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 20-23 
(NAAS rating 3.45)
16. Krishna Prasad, G, M ageshw aran, V, 
Guruprasad, R, Arputharaj, A, Senthilkumar, 
T, Patil, P . G, Jadhav, R. K (2018) Mechanical 
and Chemical Processability of Cotton / 
Kapok Blends, Cotton Research Journal, 9 (1 ), 
pp. 24-26 (NAAS rating 3.45)
17. Jagajanantha, P , Mandhyan, P . K, Krishna 
Prasad, G, Patil, Sharmila, Senthilkumar, T, 
Arputharaj, A, Patil, P . G, , (2018) Core Spun 
Yarns for Warm Clothing, Cotton Research 
Journal, 9 (1), pp. 27-29 (NAAS rating 3.45)
18. Kambli, N. D, Deshmukh, R. R, Basak, S, Patil, 
P . G, Mandhyan, P . K, Raja, A. S. M, Arputharaj, 
A, , (2018) Comparative Study of Physico­
chemical Characteristics of Cornhusk Fibre 
with Cotton, Cotton Research Journal, 9 (1 ), 
pp. 30-34 (NAAS rating 3.45)
19. S e n th ik u m a r, T, B h a r im a lla , A. K, 
Sundaramoorthy, C, Patil, P . G, Vigneshwaran, 
N  (2018) Mechanical Properties of Cotton 
Stalk Micro Particles and Fibrillated Coir Fibre 
Reinforced Epoxy Com posites, Cotton 
Research Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 35-39 (NAAS 
rating 3.45)20. Deshmukh, P . S, Bharimalla, A. K, Patil, P . G, 
Arude, V. G, Sundaramoorthy, C, Kamble, D. 
U, Jadhav, A. R, Chandrika Ram, (2018) ICAR- 
CIRCOT's Training on Quality Evaluation of 
Cotton: An Analysis for 2014-17, Cotton 
Research Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 40-43 (NAAS 
rating 3.45)
21. Krishna Prasad, G, Raja, A. S. M, Senthilkumar, 
T, Vigneshwaran, N, Patil, P . G. (2018) 
Characteristic Analysis of Commercial Wound 
Dressings, Cotton Research Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 
44-46 (NAAS rating 3.45)
22. Basak, S, Saxena, Sujata, Raja, A. S. M, Patil, P . 
G (2018) Sustainable Fire Retardancy of 
Cellulosic Materials by Application of Plant 
Bio-m acrom olecules, Cotton Research 
Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 47-50 (NAAS rating 3.45)
23. Kumar, Manoj, Potkule, Jayashree, Saxena, 
Sujata, Patil, P . G (2018) Value-addition of 
Cottonseed: Protein Extraction, Functional 
Characterization and its Application, Cotton 
Research Journal, 9 (1 ), pp. 51-57 (NAAS 
rating 3.45)
24. Kadam, D. M, Kaur, Amanpreet (2018) Review 
on Natural Fibers Based Nanocomposite 
Materials: Part -  I, Cotton Research Journal, 9 
(1 ), pp. 79-91 (NAAS rating 3.45)
25. Kannaujia, P . K, Asrey, R, Singh, A. K, Mahawar, 
M. K, Bhatia, K (2020) Evaluation of 
postharvest quality attributes of gum arabic 
and fruwash coated summer squash, Indian 
Journal of Horticulture, 77(2), pp. 394-397 
(NAAS rating 6.11)
26. Raja, A. S. M, Arputharaj, A, Senthilkumar, T, 
Saxena, Sujata, Patil, P . G (2020) Dyeing of 
cotton with reactive dyes using pre-treated 
sea water, Indian Journal of Fibre & Textile 
Research , 45 (3), pp. 319-325 (NAAS rating 
6.51)
57

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
27. Raja, A. S. M, Arputharaj, A, Krishna Prasad, G, 
Saxena, Sujata, Patil, P . G (2020) Challenges in 
dyeing of cellulosics with reactive dyes and 
practical sustainable feasibilities, Chemical 
Management in Textiles and Fashion, 79.
28. Se nt h  i l  ku m a r, T, B h a rim a lla , A. K, 
Sundaramoorthy, C, Patil, P . G, Vigneshwaran, 
N  (2020) Fibrillation of Coconut Fibers by 
M echanical R efining to Enhance Its 
Reinforcing Potential in Epoxy Composites, 
Fibers and Polymers, 21, pp. 2111-2117 
(NAAS rating 7.44)
29. Dongarwar, Nupur, Parate, Himani, Satankar, 
V arsh a, P a la n ia p p a n , Ja g a ja n a n th a , 
Kuppusamy, Pandiyan and Vellaichamy, 
Mageshwaran, "Simultaneous bioethanol 
production and lignin and ce llu lo se  
fractionation from cotton stalks: A bio­
refinery approach", Research Journal of 
Biotechnology, Vol. 15 (11), November (2020) 
(NAAS rating 5.00)
30. Sundaramurthy, V. T. and Saxena, Sujata 
(2020) The Environment and Textile Industry- 
Friendly Hirsute Cotton Variety, Indica. 
International Journal of bio-resource and  
Stress Management,  p 451 -  455, Published 
online: 20 Nov 2020 (NAAS rating 4.65) DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.23910Z1.2020.2151d
31. Chavan, S., Vigneshwaran, N  (2020) Shifts in 
m etab o lic patterns of soil b acterial 
co m m u n itie s on exp o su re to m etal 
engineered nanomaterials, Ecotoxicology 
and Environmental Safety 189, 110012, 1  
(NAAS rating 10.53)
32. Sahu, P . K., Singh, S., Gupta, A., Singh, U. B., 
Paul, S., Paul, D., Pandiyan, K., Singh, H. V., 
Saxena, A.K. (2020). A simplified protocol for 
reversing phenotypic conversion of Ralstonia 
solanacearum during experimentation.International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, vol. 17(12): 
4274. (NAAS rating 8.47)
33. P a n d iya n , K., K u sh w ah a, P., B agu l, 
S. Y ., C h a k d a r , H ., M a d h a iy a n ,
M. , Krishnamurthi, S., Kumar, P., Karthikeyan,
N. , Singh, A., Kumar, M., Singh, U. B., Saxena, 
A. K. (2020). Halomonas icarae sp. nov., a 
moderately halophilic bacterium isolated 
from  s o ils of Pentha b each , In d ia . 
International Journal of Systematic and 
Evolutionary Microbiology (NAAS rating 8.17) 
https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.004611
34. Meena VS, Jalgaonkar K, Mahawar MK, 
Bhushan B, Bibwe B and Kashyap P . (2020). 
Optim ization of process variables for 
preparation of pomegranate juice-fortified 
aonla candy. Current Science, 118 (1) :  114­
118. (NAAS rating 6.76)
35. Kamat V, Sisodiya JH, M ahaw ar MK, 
Jalgaonkar K (2020). Determination of some 
physical properties of Plum (cv. Kala 
Amritsari) fruits. International Journal of 
Chemical Studies, 8(3):225-228. (NAAS rating 
5.31)
36. Satankar, M., Patil, A. K., Kautkar, S. and 
Kumar, U. 2020. Pearl Millet: A Fundamental 
Review on Underutilized Source of Nutrition. 
Multilogic in Science. X(XXXIV): 01-04 (NAAS 
rating 5.20)
37. Patil, A. K., Satankar, M., Kautkar, S. and Raj, R. 
2020. Cloud Point Extraction: A Novel 
Approach for Extraction of Bioactive 
Compounds from Fruit and Vegetable Waste. 
Chemical Science Review and Letters 9(34): 
324-328 (NAAS rating 5.21)
38. Chaurasia, Himanshushekhar, Shah, Nawajul 
Islam, Sonica Priyadarshini, Rajeev Kumar 
and Md. Asif Khan (2020) Development of
58

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Android based Crop Advisory Application for 
Seed Spices, Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci., 
9 (3 ): 904 -9 13 , (N AAS ratin g 5.38) 
https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2020.903 .  
106
39. Sharmaa, Kanika, Guleriaa, Sanjay, Razdanb, 
Vijay K., Vikash Babu (2020) Synergistic 
antioxidant and antimicrobial activities 
of essential oils of some selected medicinal 
plants in combination and with synthetic 
c o m p o u n d s , In d u s t r ia l C r o p s  & 
Products, 1 5 4 , 112569
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112 .  
569 (NAAS Rating 10.19)
7.2 Book Chapters
1. N. V igneshw aran and A. A rp u th araj, 
Functional Finishing of Cotton Textiles Using 
Nanomaterials, In: Advances in Functional 
Finishing of Textiles, 43-56, 2020.
2. Akshay Dheeraj, Sapna Nigam, Shbana 
Begam, Sanchita Naha, Salam Jayachitra 
Devi, Himanshu Shekhar Chaurasia, Dilip 
Kumar, Ritika, S.K. Soam, N. Srinivasa Rao, 
Alka Arora, P.D. Sreekanth and V.V. Sumanth 
Kumar, Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Internet of Things (IoT) in Mitigating Climate 
Change, In: Climate Change and Indian 
Agriculture: Challenges and Adaptation 
Strategies published by ICAR-NAARM , 
R ajen dran agar, H yd erab ad -50 0  030, 
Telangana, India
7.3 Paper Presentations
1. Dr. V. G. Arude, presented an INVITED PAPER 
e n title d  'B u s in e s s  P e rsp e c tiv e  and 
Entrepreneurship Opportunities in Cotton 
Stalk By-product Based Industry in India" in 
"Cotton Production Technologies in nextdecade: Problems & Perspectives" held at 
OUAT, Bhubaneswar during 22-24 January, 
2020
The following three papers were presented in the 
54th Annual Convention of Indian Society of 
Agricultural Engineers (ISAE) and International 
Symposium on "Artificial Intelligence Based 
Future Technologies in Agriculture" at Hyatt 
Regency Pune from 07 -09 Jan 2020.
2. Arude V.G., Shukla S. K Patil and P . G., 2020. 
Development and evaluation of cotton gin 
trash handling system for control of pink 
bollworm in ginneries presented by Dr. V. G. 
Arude.
3. Dattatreya M  Kadam, Jagajanantha and 
Tushar Mahajan "Processing of Fibers for 
Development of Composite Materials for 
Sanitary Pads" presented by Dr. D. M. Kadam.
4. Manoj Kumar, Jayasree Potkule, P . G. Patil and 
Sujata Saxena "Functional characterization of 
cottonseed protein" presented by Dr. Manoj 
Kumar.
The following two papers were presented by 
Dr. Manoj Kumar in the National seminar on 
Smart Horticulture at Jhalawar, Rajasthan on 30t h  
January 2020
5. M  a n o j K u m a r , N  .  V i g n e s h w a r a n , 
T.Senthilkumar, A. K. Bharimalla, D.U.Kamble 
and P.G. Patil, "Valorization of lignocellulosic 
biomass for developing seedling trays"
6. Manoj Kumar and Charanjit Kaur "Optimizing 
the extraction process of natural antioxidants 
from punica granatum peel using microwave- 
assisted extraction: a value addition 
approach".
7. Dr. P . Jagajanantha Presented a paper "The 
Concept as defined by Apparel and Textile 
Scholars -  Social Responsibility", in National 
Conference on 'Business Intelligence for
59

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Sustainable Development -  NCBI 2020, held 
on 12 t h  Feb. 2020 organised by S.A. 
Engineering College, Chennai
8. Dr. P . Jagajanantha Presented a paper 
"Conductive Yarn for Heat Generating 
Textiles", in 1s t  International Conference on 
'Indian Context, Nature, Science, Information 
Media, General Management, Humanities 
and Technology (INSIGHT 2020), held on 29t h  
Feb. 2020 organised by S.A. College of Arts & 
Science, Chennai
9. Dr. Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist & Head 
i/c CBPD presented a paper "Potential of 
Cotton Textiles for pesticide protective 
clothing" at International conference on 
Functional Textiles and Clothing 2020 held at 
IIT, Delhi during 7-9 February, 2020.
10. A poster on "Synthesis of Nano-Sulfur :  A 
Potential Agricultural Input" by Dr. Manoj 
Mahawar was presented, in 11th Bengaluru 
INDIA Nano conference held at Bengaluru 
and during 2-4 March 2020
Two research papers were presented in National
Conference on "Role of Agricultural Engineering
Innovations in Doubling the Farmers' Income"
organized by the College of A gricultural
Engineering, Raichur (Karnataka) during 12-14
March, 2020.
11. "Development and Evaluation of Sanitary Pad 
Properties" by Dattatreya M  Kadam, 
Jagajanantha and Tushar Mahajan (Poster)
12. "Development and Characterization of WPI 
Based Biopolymers Incorporated With Silver 
Nano-Particle" by Dattatreya M Kadam, 
Pranita Jaiswal, Amanpreet Kuar, Supriya 
Rattan (Oral Presentation)
13. Dr. V. G. Arude, presented an invited paper 
t it le d  " B u s in e s s  P e r s p e c t iv e  and 
Entrepreneurship Opportunities in Cotton
60Stalk By-product based Industry in India" in a 
w e b in a r on 'S co p e  of A g r ic u ltu r a l 
Entrepreneurship Development' organised 
by Navsari Agricultural University (NAU), 
Bharuch, Gujarat on 19t h  August 2020.
14. G. K rishn a P ra sad , S P e riyasa m y, T 
Senthilkumar, A. S. M. Raja, P . G. Patil & V. G. 
A ru d e  p re s e n te d  a p a p e r in 5th 
International Conference on Industrial 
Textiles -  Products, Applications and 
Prospects (InduTech 2020) -  Webinar titled 
"Chemical Surface Roughening of Nylon 6,6 
and its Effect on Bonding Strength in Rubber 
Composites" during 21s t  -  23*1  August 2020.
15. T. Senthilkumar, G. Krishna Prasad, P . G. Patil, 
V. G. A ru d e , M. M urugesan and N. 
Vigneshwaran, Presented Paper "Production 
and Characterization of Organic Filler 
R e in fo rc e d  U n sa tu ra te d  P o ly e s te r 
Composite" in 5th International Conference 
on Industrial Textiles -  Products, Applications 
and Prospects (InduTech 2020) -  Webinar 
during 21* -  23r f  August 2020.
16. A. S. M. Raja, A Arputhraj, G Krishnaprasad, S. 
Saxena, and P.G Patil presented Paper in 5t h  
International Conference on Industrial 
Textiles -  Products, A pplications and 
Prospects (InduTech 2020) -  Webinar 21s t  -  
23r d  August 2020 on "Mosquito Repellent 
Finishing on Cotton Home Textiles through 
LBL coating with Cationic chemicals & 
microencapsulated citronella oil".
17. Dr. P . Jagajanantha Presented a paper on 
"Heat Generating Textile Products using 
Conductive Yarn" in an International 
Conference on Advances in Technical Textiles 
(ICATT-2020), Organised by Department of 
Textile Technology, Bannari Amman Institute 
of Technology, Sathyamangalam, during 
24th-25th October, 2020.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
7.4 Popular Articles
1. Manoj Kumar (2019), Paruthi Paal, a nutrient- 
rich healthy drink from cottonseed: an Indian 
delicacy. Journal of Ethnic Food 6: 32
2. Bharimalla A. K., Patil P . G., Palkar, J., 
Mahawar, M. K. (2020). Nanotechnological 
approaches for synthesis of Sulphur 
nanoparticles. Agriculture & Food: E- 
Newsletter 2 (11): 182-184.
3. Jalgaonkar K., Jagajanantha P., Arputharaj, A., 
Mandhyan P . K. (2020)- Recent developments 
in the indoor air purification technology and 
application methods, Food and Scientific 
Reports, November 2020, 1(1): 23-26.
4. Bharimalla AK, Mahawar MK, Patil PG (2020). 
Inclusive approach for strengthening of agri­
business start-ups ecosystem . Indian 
Farming. 70(1): 15-17
5. An article on "COVID -19 ON Indian Cotton" by 
C. D. Mayee, Bhagirath Choudhary, DeSouza 
Blaise, Prashant G. Patil was published in The 
ICAC Recorder, June 2020, Volume XXXIX, 
No.2, ISSN 1022-6303
6. Kannaujia, P., K., Kale, S., Indore, N., Mahawar,
M., K., Bhan, C., (2020) -  3
M flA K  % i h$ ^ , 41(5): 35-37
7. tf^T, f ^ ^? 2020, 3
% % 3T? 3fT^?,
^lf?3^l, tf\. 3T&3,  yrdt
8. A Mahapatra, J Dhakane- Lad, S Patil, M  
Kumar, AK Bharimalla, PG Patil (2020). The 
advent of nanotechnology in edible coating. 
Beverage & Food World, 47 (3), 24-27
9. Kunal Gaikwad, Senthilkumar T and Santosh 
HB, 'The Journey of Cotton from Seed 
to Fabric', Food and Scientific Reports,Volume: 1, Issue: 8, 2020, Page 59-62
10. Mahawar M  K, Jalgaonkar K, Bhushan (2020). 
Processing, packaging and development of 
space foods. Food and Beverage Newsletter.
11. Bibwe B, Jalgaonkar K, Kannaujia P (2020). 
Canning of litchi. Agriculture and Food E- 
Newsletter, 2(6):558-559
12. Kautkar, S. and Raj R. 2020. Novel Non­
thermal Food Processing Technologies for 
Quality Food Production" in Readers Shelf. 
16(05): 20-23.
13. Kautkar, S., Raj, R., Patil, A. K. and Satankar, M. 
2020. Ultrasound and its Applications in Food 
Processing. Readers Shelf. 16(07): 24-26.
14. Patil, A. K., Satankar, M., Kautkar, S. and Raj R. 
2020. Modern Engineering Technologies: A 
Boon to Transform Indian Agriculture. 
Readers Shelf. 16(05). 55-57.
15. Satankar, M., Patil, A. K., Kautkar, S. and Raj, R. 
A N ovel E x tra c tio n  T e ch n iq u e s for 
polyphenols from Fruit and Their Waste 
Products. Readers Shelf. 16(12): 13-15.
16. Rajeev Kumar, Sonica Priyadarshini, Md. Asif 
Khan, Animesh Kumar, Pramod Kumar 
Moury and Himanshu shekhar Chaurasia, 
PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY OF AZOLLA AS A 
FODDER CROP, Marumegh: Volume 5(1): 
2020
7.5 Newspaper Articles/ Report
1. A report on "Lint based cotton marketing 
begins in APMC, Higanghat, Wardha" was 
published in Agrowon dated 2n d  January 2020 
and The Times of India dated 3r d  January 
2020.
61

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
7.6 Other Publications
1. Annual Report 2019 (English)
2. Annual Report 2019 (Hindi)
3. Mandhyan PK, Arputharaj A, Jagajanantha P , 
Jalgaonkar K, Fibre quality Report- AICRP on 
Cotton, May 2020.
4. P . G .Patil, PK Mandhyan, A. Arputharaj 
"Study on weight change of cotton bales 
during storage" report prepared for 
consultancy project for Cotton Corporation 
of India, July 2020.
5. Schedule of Fees for Tests
Brochures
1. Nono Zinc Oxide Production Technology
2. ICAR-CIRCOT NANOCELLULOSE PILOT PLANT 
(Using Eco-Friendly & Energy-Efficient 
Production Technology)
3. Valorizing Banana Pseudostem From Waste 
to Wealth
4. Naturally colour Cotton An opportunity for 
innovative Textile Startups
5. Empowering Women with Health & Hygiene 
Textiles
6. SUCCESS STORY ICAR-CIRCOT Calibration 
Cotton7. Success Story ICA R-CIRCO T Portable 
Laboratory Model Gin
8. ICAR-CIRCOT Bajaj Cotton Pre-cleaner For 
Improved Ginning Performance & Lint 
Quality
9. ICAR-CIRCOT Green Crematorium (Flyer)
10. CIRCOT_LLC Baton Cotton Fabric Reinforced 
Rubber Baton :  A Boon to Security -Police 
force (Flyer)
11. Dining ware & packaging material from plant 
waste banana - An Innovative Product of 
CIRCOT-R-ABI Startup
12. Agro-Residue reinforced Natural Rubber 
Garden Pots A Product of ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI 
Centre, Mumbai
13. Nano-finished High performance Sleeping 
Bags A Product of ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI Centre, 
Mumbai
14. Training Leaflets:
i. Spectroscopic & Chrom atographic 
Techniques for Material characterization
ii. Characterization of Material using X-Ray 
Diffractometer (XRD)
iii. Composite Material
iv. Instrumental Evaluation of Clothing 
Comfort
62

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
8. IMC, RAC and IRC Meetings
8.1 Institute Management Committee (IMC)
The Seventy Nine meeting of the Institute 
Management Committee (IMC) was held on 17t h  
Dec., 2020 at 2.30a.m. on Virtual mode in the 
Institute. Dr. P.G. Patil, Director was in the Chair 
and following members were present.
• Dr. S. N. Jha, Asstt.Director General (PE),
ICAR, New Delhi
• Dr. Abhijit Kar, Principal Scientist, IARI, New 
Delhi
• Dr. G. Balasubramani, Principal Scientist, (BIO 
Tech),CICR, Nagpur
• Dr. Vilas Kharche, DR, PDKV, Akola, M.S.
• Dr. L. K. Nayak, Principal Scientist (AS&PE), 
ICAR-NINFET, Kolkata
• Shri Dhrupatrao Sawle Patil
• Dr. (Smt) Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist 
(Biochem) ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai
• Shri Sunil Kumar, Senior AO, ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai, Member Secretary
Due to Corona pandemic in the country and as per 
guidelines of ICAR this year IMC meeting was
8.2 XXVI Research Advisory Committee (RAC)conducted on virtual mode.
Some of the members could not attend the 
meeting due to some preoccupation and were 
granted leave of absence by the IMC. A detailed 
account of research achievem ents of the 
institute was presented and a documentary on 
National Laboratory on Advance Material  
Ch aracterization  was shown to the 
Committee.
The minutes of the 78t h  IMC meeting held at 
CIRCOT, Mumbai on 9t h  July, 2019 were approved 
by the committee. The committee expressed its 
satisfaction over the progress made in the 
settlement of audit paras of the Institute. New 
items purchased during 2018-19 and 2019-20 and 
the progress of the works under the Institute 
budget head were reviewed.
The 26t h  meeting of the Research Advisory 
Committee (RAC) of ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai was 
held on virtual platform on 8t h  June 2020. Dr. N. C. 
Patel, Form er Vice Chancellor, Junagarh 
Agricultural University and Anand Agricultural 
University and Chairman, RAC presided over the 
meeting. The RAC members namely Dr. M. K. 
Sharma, Prof. (Dr.) U. J. Patil, Prof. (Dr.) S. R. 
Shukla, Dr. N.N. Mahapatra, Dr. Narendra G. Shah, 
Shri D. B. Sawale, Dr. S. N. Jha participated in 
online meeting. Besides this all Heads of Division 
and scientist participated in the online meeting.Dr. P . G. Patil, Director, ICAR-CIRCOT, made a 
presentation of major research achievements and 
other activities undertaken by the institute in last 
three years. Dr. V. G. Arude, Member Secretary, 
RAC, presented the Action Taken Report (ATR) on 
the proceedings of 25th RAC
Dr. N. C. Patel, Chairman RAC, appreciated 
Scientists and Director for excellent work done 
during last three years and wished that CIRCOT 
will make much more progress in next three years. 
He urged scientists to take this work to the 
national and international level and improve 
visibility of the institute at international level.
63

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
RAC suggested scientist to work on the research 
areas such as removal of contamination from 
seed cotton, machinery for logistic supply of 
cotton stalk, Cationization of cotton fibres, 
blending of cotton with other sustainable natural 
fibres, guidelines for recycling of fibres, 
automation in cotton post-harvest processing 
machinery through application of AI, IoT, sensor 
technology and robotics, studies to ascertain 
toxicological and environmental safety aspects of 
nano materials, standardization of an eco­
friendly, efficient and economical techniques for 
removal of gossypol, production of edible starch 
from cotton stalks etc.
8.3 Institute Research Council (IRC)
120t h  Annual IRC Meeting
The 120t h  Institute Research Council (IRC) Meeting 
of ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai was held on 10^ & 15^ 
July, 2020 under the chairmanship of Dr. P.G. Patil, 
Director through Video Conferencing.
On the opening day, Dr. N. Vigneshwaran, PME 
Nodal Officer welcomed the Chairman, Scientists 
and Technical officers for the 120t h  IRC in the 
virtual platform. In his opening remarks, Dr. Patil 
stressed the role to be played by ICAR-CIRCOT to 
the farming community & the society at large 
during the COVID-19 pandem ic. Also, he 
mentioned that there would not be any EFC/SFC 
approval for the year 2020-21. He emphasized 
that all the scientists should make proper plan to 
utilize the budget that is being allotted monthly 
otherwise the budget will be automatically lapsed 
as per the new direction from the Council. This 
was followed by presentations from Scientists on 
final reports of completed projects, progress of 
on-going research projects and new proposals for 
consideration of the IRC.Further RAC suggested to document impact of 
five prominent institute technologies adopted by 
stakeholders and also organize award/prize 
winning competition among scientists of institute 
or among students and budding entrepreneurs on 
the occasion of upcoming centenary year 
celebrations of the institute in 2024. RAC 
suggested for mass scale advertising to popularize 
institute activities and technologies developed by 
institute through media and digital platform
Half-yearly IRC Meeting
The half-yearly Institute Research Council (IRC) 
Meeting of ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai was held on 21s t  
& 24^ December, 2020 under the chairmanship of 
Dr. P.G. Patil, Director in the conference hall. 
Outstation staff joined the meeting through 
virtual platform.
The progress of ongoing projects were presented 
by the scientists and comments and suggestions 
were given by the chairman and other scientists.
64

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
9. Participation in Seminars/Conferences /  
Meetings / Workshops
Scientists and technical staff of the institute 
attend the seminars / symposia / workshops / 
conferences at national as well as international 
level to present their research work and keep 
them abreast of the latest developments in their 
specific areas. Their participation in such eventsand publication of proceedings / abstracts results 
in wider dissemination of the institute activities. 
The staff members also present their work and 
share experience and knowledge gained during 
the visit with fellow colleagues through formal 
presentations.
Table 9.1 Participation in conferences during 2020
Name of the Conference Organizer / Venue Date Participants
Cotton Production 
Technologies in next 
decade: Problems & 
PerspectivesOUAT, Bhubaneswar 22-24 January, 
2020Dr. V. G. Arude
National conference on 
"Recent trends for 
development of functional 
food"MAFSU, Nagpur 06-07 February, 
2020Dr. S. S. Kautkar
International conference 
on Functional Textiles and 
Clothing 2020IIT, Delhi 7-9 February, 
2020Dr. Sujata Saxena
National conference on 
Omics for Food, Health 
and Environment 
(OFHE2020)Department of Biotechnology, 
DDU Gorakhpur University14-15 February, 
2020Dr. K. Pandiyan
International conference 
on Banana 2020ICAR-NRC-Banana at 
Tiruchirapalli, Tamilnadu22-25 February, 
2020Dr. A. Arputharaj
11t h  Bengaluru INDIA 
Nano conferenceBengaluru 2-4 March, 
2020Dr. Manoj Kumar Mahawar
National Conference 
on "Role of Agricultural 
Engineering Innovations in 
Doubling the Farmers' 
Income"College of Agricultural 
Engineering, Raichur 
(Karnataka)12-14 March, 
2020Dr. Dattatreya M  Kadam
5th International 
Conference on Industrial 
Textiles -  Products, 
Applications and 
Prospects (InduTech 2020)PSG College of Technology,
Coimbatore
Online21 -  23 August 
2020Dr. P .  Jagajanantha
Online International 
Conference on "Advances 
in Technical Textiles 
(ICATT-2020)"Department of Textile 
Technology, Bannari Amman 
Institute of Technology, 
Sathyamangalam, Tamil Nadu 
Online24-25 October, 
2020Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar 
Dr. Sharmila Patil 
Dr. A. Arputharaj 
Dr. P. Jagajanantha
65

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Name of the Conference Organizer / Venue Date Participants
National digital 
conference on "Technical 
Textiles for Atmanirbhar 
Bharat"CII and Ministry of Textiles 
Online04 November, 
2020All ICAR-CIRCOT Scientists
Table 9.2 Participation in Seminars / symposia
Title Organizer / Venue Date Participants
54t h  Annual Convention of 
Indian Society of 
Agricultural Engineers 
(ISAE) and International 
Symposium on "Artificial 
Intelligence Based Future 
Technologies in 
AgricultureHyatt Regency Pune 07 - 09 January, 
2020Dr. P .  G. patil 
Dr. D. M. Kadam 
Dr. Manoj Kumar 
Dr. A. K. bharimalla 
Dr. Jyoti Dhakane 
Dr. V. G. Arude 
Dr. P. S. Deshmukh 
Dr. S. V. Ghadge
National seminar on Smart 
HorticultureJhalawar, Rajasthan 30t h  January 2020 Dr. Manoj Kumar 
M r. D. U. Kamble
Seminar on 'Business 
Opportunities in Medical 
Textiles'South Gujarat 
Productivity Council at 
Nanpura, Surat, Gujrat17 February 2020 Dr. T. Senthilkumar 
Dr. G. Krishna Prasad
Seminar on Opportunities 
for T extile Industries in 
Challenging ScenarioTextile Association 
(India), Mumbai (unit) 
at Hotel Fortune Park 
Galaxy, Vapi, Gujarat29 February 2020 Dr. T. Senthilkumar
Webinar on "Time Series 
Analysis and Forecasting 
using Eviews"Online 02 April, 2020 Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy
webinar on "Role of 
Nanotechnology in Food 
and AgricultureCentre for 
Nanotechnology, 
College of Agricultural 
Engineering, UAS, 
Raichur, Karnataka, 
India21 August 2020 Dr. Dattatreya M  Kadam
Webinar for the nodal 
officers for Evaluation of 
Science indicators of public 
funded R&D organizationOffice of Principal 
Scientific Advisor to 
Govt. of India 
Online20 October, 2020 Dr. Sujata Saxena
"Role of Natural Fibres for 
Atma Nirbhara Bharat" 
two days technical 
webinarIndian Natural Fibre 
Society (TINFS) in 
Collaboration with 
ICAR-NINFET, Kolkata27-28 November 
2020Shri. G. T. V. Prabu
"ICAR-NAHEP-IDP National 
Webinar on Agro-Textiles 
for Smart Farming and 
Entrepreneurship 
Development"University of 
Agricultural Sciences, 
Dharwad.10 December 
2020Dr. P .  G. Patil 
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran
66

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
one-week webinar series 
on "Role of technologies 
and automation in food 
processing and 
preservation"Centre for Advanced 
Science and 
Technology-Centre of 
Excellence for Digital 
Farming Solutions for 
Enhancing Productivity 
by Robots, Drones and 
AGV'S (CAAST- 
DESRDA), Vasantrao 
Naik Marathwada 
Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Parbhani (Maharashtra)14-19 May 2020 Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar
Dr. Manoj Kumar Mahawar
ISAE Webinar series-2- on 
Automation in Agriculture" 
Second webinar seriesISAE 20 May 
to
26 June 2020Shri. G. T. V. Prabu
Webinar on 
"Understanding 
Spectrometric 
Measurements"HANNA INSTRUMENTS 28 May 2020 Shri. G. T. V. Prabu
One week webinar on 
'Innovative Food 
Processing Technology for 
Entrepreneurship 
DevelopmentAnand Agricultural 
University, Gujarat30 May, 2020 to 
04 June, 2020Dr. Manoj Kumar Mahawar
Webinar on -"Impact of 
Pandemics and 
Innovations in Fashion and 
Footwear Industry"school of fashion 
design and Footwear 
Design of FDDI 
Ankleshwar, Gujarat15 June 2020 Shri. G. T. V. Prabu
Online international 
students and faculty 
development programme 
on "Innovative Food 
Processing Technologies: 
Value Addition, Food 
Safety and Security"Rajmata Vijayaraje 
Scindia Krishi Vishwa 
Vidyalaya, Gwalior 
under IDP-NAHEP on 
"Reinforcement of the 
Brand Value on 
University for Designing 
Market ready Graduates 
for Entrepreneurship 
and Employment 
Generation"29 June, 2020 to 
01 July, 2020Dr. S. S. Kautkar
10 days webinar on "Role 
of Nanotechnology in Food 
and Agriculture"Centre for 
Nanotechnology, 
College of Agricultural 
Engineering, UAS, 
Raichur, Karnataka20-29 August, 
2020Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar
Dr. Manoj Kumar Mahawar
Webinar on "Response 
Surface Methodology"ICAR-CIAE Regional 
Centre, Coimbatore28 August, 2020 Dr. S. S. Kautkar
International Webinar on 
"Resilience of Cotton 
Sector Amidst Global 
Pandemic"Indian Society for 
Cotton Improvement 
(ISCI) and ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai07 October, 2020 Dr. P .  G. Patil 
Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy 
Dr. S. V. Ghadge 
Dr. Sujata Saxena 
Dr. Kirti Jalgaonkar
67

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Dr. Sharmila Patil
Dr. Manoj Kumar Mahawar
Dr. T. Senthilkumar
International Webinar 
on Nanotechnology in 
Agriculture and 
BiotechnologyDr. Rajendra Prasad 
Central Agricultural 
University, Pusa (Bihar) 
in collaboration with 
National Higher 
Education Project 
(NAHEP)19-21 October, 
2020Dr. S. S. Kautkar
Table 9.3 Workshops / Meetings attended
Title Organizer / Venue Date Participants
National Consultative 
workshop on Agri startups to 
strenghten Agri logistics in e- 
NAMMinistry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare 
A P Shinde Hall, NASC, 
PUSA, New Delhi21s t  January 
2020Mr. Hemant Ladgoankar
Annual Review Meeting of 
CRP on Natural FibresTNAU, Coimbatore 29th  January 
2020Dr. P . G. Patil 
Dr. A. S. M. Raja 
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran 
Dr. A. Arputharaj
Annual meeting of AICRP on 
CottonOnline 18th-19th May, 
2020Dr. P . G. Patil 
Dr. P . K. Mandhyan 
Dr. A. Arputharaj
Annual Review Meeting of 
CRP on Natural FibresOnline 16th  December, 
2020Dr. P . G. Patil
Dr. A. S. M. Raja
PIs & Co-PIs of CRP projects
One day workshop on 
Technological Innovation 
Under CRP on Natural FibresICAR-NINFET, Kolkata 21s t  February, 
2020Dr A.S.M. Raja
One day online workshop on 
"Training Management 
Information System (TMIS) 
for HRD Nodal Officers of 
ICAR"ICAR 8th  May, 2020 Dr. T. Senthilkumar
Meeting of Dyestuff and 
Specialty Chemicals, TXD 07 
subcommittee of BISManak Bhavan, New 
Delhi10th  February 
2020Dr. Sujata Saxena
SFC Review Meeting Agricultural Engineering 
SMD, ICAR,
NASC Complex, New 
Delhi24th  February 
2020Dr. P .G. Patil 
Dr. A.S.M. Raja,
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran
BIS mobiletech textile 
committee TXD 38 meetingBIS office, New Delhi 27th  February 
2020Dr. A. Arputharaj
Meeting of Composites and 
Speciality Fibres Sectional 
Committee, TXD 40 in joint 
session with Textile MaterialsBIS office, New Delhi 29th  February 
2020Dr. A. Arputharaj
68

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Title Organizer / Venue Date Participants
for Sportech Applications 
Sectional Committee, TXD 37
Meeting of "Technical 
Textiles for Agro-tech, TXD 
35" BTS sectional committeeBureau of Indian 
standards online18th  May 2020 Dr. G Krishna Prasad
Fifteenth meeting of 
Agriculture and Food 
Processing Equipment 
Sectional Committee, FAD 20 
of BISBureau of Indian 
standards22n d  May 2020 Dr. P . G. Patil 
Dr. V. G. Arude
15th  Meeting of Textile 
Machinery and Accessories 
Sectional Committee, TXD14Bureau of India 
Standards, Mumbai25th  June 2020 Dr. T. Senthilkumar
Meeting of Board of Studies 
on Textile Science and 
Apparel Design of SNDT 
UniversityOnline 17th  June, 2020 Dr. Sujata Saxena
Meeting on "Role of 
Agrotextiles in National 
Technical Textiles Mission 
(NTTM)"Organized online by 
Ministry of Textiles, 
Govt. of India8th  September 
2020Dr. P . G. Patil 
Dr. Sujata Saxena 
Dr. A.S. M. Raja 
Dr. Vigneshwaran 
Dr. P . K. Mandhyan 
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla
National Oilseed 
Brainstorming meetOnline mode organized 
by the Indian Institute 
for Soybean Research, 
Indore23-25
September 2020Dr. Sujata Saxena
26th  Meeting of Chemical 
Methods of Tests, Sectional 
Committee, TXD 05 of BISBIS, organized virtually 20th October, 
2020Dr. Sujata Saxena
Meeting regarding NABL 
Accreditation of ICAR-NINFET 
Lab under ISO 17025:201Organized by ICAR- 
NINFET, KolkattaOctober, 2020 Dr A S M  Raja
Dr . Manoj kumar Puniya
Director's participation in Major meetings / events
Dr. P . G. Patil, Director participated in the 
meeting with DDG (Engg.) and Directors of 
Agricultural Engineering SMD through 
videoconferencing on 18-03-2020.
D r. P . G. Patil, Director participated in the ICAR 
Directors conference chaired by the DG, ICAR 
through videoconferencing on 19-03-2020.
D r. P . G. Patil, Director participated in the ICAR 
Directors conference chaired by the DG, ICARthrough videoconferencing on 10-04-2020.
D r. P . G. Patil, Director attended the meeting of 
Directors and SMD officials under the 
chairmanship of DDG (AE) on 30 April, 2020 
through videoconferencing. The scientists and 
technical officers associated with PME cell were 
also present during the meeting.
D r. P . G. Patil, Director attended Annual AICRP 
on Cotton workshop conducted through
69

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
videoconferencing during 18-19 May 2020 
along with D r. P . K. Mandhyan, Head in-charge,
QEID, and Scientists and Technical Officers of 
QEID.
• D r. P . G. Patil , Director, ICAR-CIRCOT conducted 
a web seminar on "ICAR-CIRCOT's Nanotech 
Research Initiatives and contributions in Value 
Creation and Entrepreneurship Development 
in Cotton Sector" for students of Food 
Chem istry and Technology Laboratory, 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department,
IIT, Kharagpur on 3r d  October 2020
• D r. P . G. Patil, Director attended ICAR Regional 
committee II Meeting on 8t h  October 2020 
through virtual platform.
Visits to Regional units and other Institutions
• D r. P . G. Patil, Director visited regional unit at 
Dharwad on 20t h  January 2020 to review the 
activities. D r. Patil also had a meeting with the 
Vice Chancellor of University of Agricultural 
Sciences, Dharwad to discuss about the 
facilities required for the CIRCOT unit
• Dr. P . G. Patil, Director attended the 34t h  
Convocation ceremony of D r. P.D.K.V., Akola 
held on 5t h  February 2020 as Executive Council 
Member of D r. P.D.K.V., Akola, nominated by 
Hon'ble Director General, ICAR, New DelhiD r. P . G. Patil, Director, ICAR-CIRCOT delivered 
the Inaugural Address in "ICAR-NAHEP-IDP 
National Webinar on Agro-Textiles for Smart 
Farming and Entrepreneurship Development" 
on 10t h  December 2020, organized by 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad.
Dr. P . G. Patil, Director, CIRCOT attended 
Maharashtra Agricultural Universities 48t h  Joint 
AGRESCO Meet 2020 online on 27t h  October 
2020
D r. P . G. Patil, Director visited Ginning Training 
Centre of ICAR-CIRCOT at Nagpur on 6t h  
February 2020 and delivered a lecture on the 
topic "Post-Harvest Processing of Cotton & 
Value Addition to by-product" to the farmer 
trainees attending training during the period 3­
6 February 2020
D r. P . G. Patil, Director visited regional unit at 
Coimbatore on 30th January 2020 to review the 
activities
70

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
10. Events Organized
Seminars / Workshops / Conference / Meetings / Lectures
A n n u a l R e v ie w  M e e t in g  o f C R P  o n  
N a tu r a l F ib re s
Consortia Research Project (CRP) on Natural 
Fibres is being implemented by the institute as 
Lead centre. Annual Review Meeting of CRP on 
Natural Fibres at TNAU, Coimbatore during 
28t h - 29t h  January, 2020 under chairmanship of 
DDG (Engg.)
In te r n a l r e v ie w  w o r k s h o p  o f C R P  o n  
N a tu ra l F ib re s
One day internal review workshop of CRP on 
Natural was organized at ICAR- CIRCOT on 
16t h  January, 2020. Principal Investigators of 
different projects from lead as well as cooperating 
centres namely ICAR-NIRJAFT, Kolkata, Assam 
Agricultural University, Jorhat, Tamilnadu 
Agricultural University, Coimbatore participated 
in the workshop. Dr. P.G. Patil, Director, ICAR- 
CIRCOT and Nodal officer for CRP-Natural Fibre 
project chaired the technical session and two 
distinguished scientists namely Dr. A.J. Shaikh, 
former director of CIRCOT and Dr. R.P. Nachane 
Former Head, QEID, CIRCOT acted as subject 
experts for the review meeting. Totally 13 projects 
presentation were made during the workshop by 
the PIs of the projects. The products developed 
under the project like pineapple fibre made shawl, 
yak-jute blended jackets, salt free dyeing 
technology based shirts etc. were shown to the 
chairman and experts.C R P  In te r n a l R e v ie w  M e e t in g
ICAR-CIRCOT, the lead centre of CRP on 
Natural fibres organized an "Internal Review 
Meeting" on 16 t h  December, 2020 to review 
the progress of the projects undertaken by 
lead and cooperative centres. during the 
year 2020.
M e e t in g  o f R IC
The 1s t  Meeting of RKVY-RAFTAAR Incubation 
(RIC) Committee for 2nd Cohort of CIRCOT-R-ABI 
was held in parts on 9th, 10t h , 11t h  and 16^ 
September 2020 under the chairmanship of 
Dr. P . G. Patil, Director, ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai. 
2 n d  RIC of 2 n d  Cohort for Pre-Seed stage 
fu n d in g  & Seed -Stage fu n d in g  held on 
19^ & 21* December 2020.
F M S  t r a in in g  c u m  w o r k s h o p
ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology (CIRCOT), Mumbai had organised a 
one day Workshop cum Training programme on 
ICAR Financial Management System (FMS) on 4th 
Jan, 2020 for the finance and administrative 
personnel of ICAR institutes. Total 65 nos. of 
participants from 16 ICAR Institutes including 
regional stations located at Maharashtra, Gujarat, 
Goa & Kerala had participated in the Workshop.
71

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Dr. P.G. Patil, Director, CIRCOT, Mumbai 
welcomed Shri G.P. Sharma, Director (Fin.), ICAR, 
New Delhi and all the participants and opened 
the Workshop by his welcome remarks about 
the background and objective of the training 
session on FMS in ICAR. Shri G.P. Sharma, 
Director (Fin.) interacted and gave valuable inputs 
to all the participants on important issues 
especially on maintenance of the asset register, 
loans and advances and various other issues 
pertaining to the Financial Management System 
(FM S). P articip an ts also expressed high 
appreciation for the topic and objectives of 
the training workshop, as very relevant to 
their work.
e -O ff ic e  T r a in in g
e-Office support team from ICAR-IASRI visited 
ICAR-CIRCOT and conducted a training to the local 
admins and master trainers during 09t h  -10t h  
January, 2020 for the implementation of e-Office 
in the institute. 10 staff members attended the 
training.
W o r ld  C o t t o n  D a y  In te r n a t io n a l w e b in a r
An International webinar on "Resilience of Cotton 
Sector amidst global pandemic" was organized to 
celebrate World Cotton Day by ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai in collaboration with the Indian Society 
for Cotton Improvement (ISCI) on 7t h  October, 
2020. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra, Secretary DARE, 
and DG, ICAR was the Chief Guest on the
72o c c a s io n . Dr. K. A la g u su n d a  ra m, DDG 
(Agricultural Engineering), was the Chairman and 
Dr. T. R. Sharma was the Guest of Honour. The 
delegates of the w ebinar include ADG's 
(Engineering and Crop Science), representatives 
from ICAC, UNCTAD, Stakeholders involved in 
Cotton processing and trade, researchers, 
academia, and students.
S e m in a r  o n  M a h ila  K is a n  D iw a s
M ahila Kisan D ivas was ce le b ra te d  on 
15t h  October 2020. With a view to increase the 
active participation and empower women in the 
mainstream of agriculture, 15 October is being 
celebrated nationwide as National Women 
Farmers Day. On this occasion, a seminar was 
organized in the Institute by the Internal 
Complaints .  Com m ittee with the theme, '  
Women farmers ' contribution to agriculture'
Dr. Sujata Saxena, Principal Scientist & Head 
i/c CBPD & Chair person of the committee 
welcomed all present. Dr.P.G.Patil, Director, 
ICAR-CIRCOT, in his presidential speech said 
that it is the responsibility of agricultural 
scientists to invent women-friendly gadgets, 
ergonomics-based equipment and machinery 
and technologies for various agricultural 
operations so that they should be able to do 
agricultural work with minimum labor and 
maximum ease.
Dr. Sharmila Patil, Dr. Jyoti Dhakane and 
Dr. Kanika Sharma Scientists at the institute 
expressed their views on the topic. They outlined

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
the objectives of organizing Mahila Kisan Divas. 
Expressed their views about present status of 
women farmers and insisted on a constant need 
to sensitize them for better farming practices with 
which they can improve their life, need of 
providing innovative farming techniques for 
upliftment of women farmers, insights on 
lack of equality rights in land ownership, 
difficulties faced by women farmer due to 
lack of w o m e n -frie n d ly equ ip m en t and 
machinery for agricultural operations etc. They 
also highlighted the efforts being made by the 
government towards empowerment of women 
farm ers by way of p ro vid in g loans and 
subsidies on soft terms and also mentioned 
about women centric strategies and micro­
finance initiatives being undertaken in that 
direction.
Dr. S. N. Pandey Memorial Lecture
The first Dr. S.N. Pandey Memorial lecture was 
jointly organized by the ICAR- Central Institute 
for Research on Cotton Technology (CIRCOT) and 
the Indian Fibre Society (IFS), Mumbai on 24th  
January, 2020 in the Jubilee Hall of ICAR- CIRCOT 
at 3.30 PM. Th is inaugural lecture was 
delivered by Mr. C. N. Sivaram akrishnan, 
Industry Consultant & Chartered Colourist on 
Technological Options for Sustainable Processing 
of Textiles.
Dr. S. N. Pandey was the former Director of ICAR- 
CIRCOT and founder chairman and president of 
IFS. He was an excellent researcher with 
more than 400 publications and many patents to 
his credit and his main field of interest was textile 
processing and finishing and by product 
utilization. He was an able administrator also 
and at one point of time, he was successfully 
holding the charge of the Director of threeICAR institutes viz. JTRL, Kolkata, CRIJAF, 
Barrackpore and CIAE, Bhopal. Though he was 
the Director of CIRCOT for a short time of 5-6 
months only but he could achieve many 
things like formation of Indian Fibre Society 
and organization of a seminar in a five star 
hotel w ithout any funding support from 
the ICAR/institute. The speaker Mr. C. N. 
Sivaram akrishnan is w ell- known textile 
co n sultant with long experience in wet 
p r o c e s s in g  a nd S p e c ia  lity  C h e m ic a  l  s 
Manufacturing Industries. Mr. Sivaramakrishnan 
in his lecture spoke at length about sustainability 
and the technological advances today available to 
the textile processors to make this industry more 
sustainable. He said that use of ultra-low liquor 
ratio machines and combining of two or more 
processing steps can result in substantial savings 
of resources. Recycling of process chemicals 
and water and their reuse are the need of hour in 
view of the zero liquid discharge norms 
prescribed by the regulations. Eco regulations for 
the finished products are also getting stricter and 
due to the fragmented nature of textile value 
chain, caution has to be exercised in procurement 
of inputs at each and every step of manufacturing 
process to eliminate the risk of inadvertent 
incorporation of banned substances such as 
phthalates, heavy metals etc. in textiles. 
There was good participation from textile 
researchers in the programme.
73

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Accreditation Audits
N A B L  A c c r e d it a t io n  R e n e w a l
External audit for Renewal of NABL Accreditation 
to the institute was successfully conducted on 
4th  & 5th  February, 2020 with Mr. S.P Singh as lead 
assessor and Mr. R. A. Shaikh as technical assessor 
and no non-conformities were observed
IS O  9 0 0 1 :2 0 1 5  R e c e r t ific a t io n  A u d it
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has conducted a 
re-certification audit for the ISO 9001:2015 
quality management system of the Institute 
during 11t h  and 12t h  of December 2020. Three 
auditors, Mr. P . K. Kush (Lead Auditor), Mr. Tilak 
Raj (Auditor) and Mr Jitu Adhyapak, (Auditor -  in 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has conducted a 
re-certification audit for the ISO 9001:2015 
quality management system of the Institute 
during 11^ and 12^ of December 2020. Three 
auditors, Mr. P . K. Kush (Lead Auditor), Mr. Tilak 
Raj (Auditor) and Mr Jitu Adhyapak, (Auditor -  in -  
Training) conducted the audit through virtual 
mode covering all the Divisions & Sections under 
the scope for the effective implementation of ISO 
9001:2015 standard. Based on the audit 
conducted by the way of verificatio n  ofdocum ents, records, interaction with the 
concerned officers and verification of system of 
internal audit and management review and 
physical evidences collected, the auditors 
concluded that institute is im plem enting 
documented quality management systems as per 
IS /ISO  9 0 0 1 :2 0 1 5  e ffe c tiv e ly  and also  
demonstrated the continual improvement in 
systems and processes. During the closing 
meeting of audit on 12^ December 2020, the lead 
auditor Mr. P.K. Kush appreciated the institute for 
e ffe c tiv e  im p le m e n ta tio n  of QM S and 
recommended the renewal of Institute license 
under IS/ISO 9001:2015 for the period of three 
years.
Other Events
Celebration of Foundation Day
ICAR-CIRCOT celebrated its 97t h  Foundation Day 
and Agricultural Education Day in a virtual 
platform on 3r d  December 2020.
Dr.P.G.Patil Director, ICAR-CIRCOT welcomed 
the dignitaries for the function and highlighted 
major achievements and congratulated all the 
staff members of the institute for their 
committed work.
74Dr. K. Alagusundaram, Deputy Director General 
(Agrl, Engg) was the Chief Guest on the occasion. 
The Chief Guest congratulated the Director and 
staff for bagging "Sardar Patel Outstanding ICAR 
Institute Award -  2019". He also inaugurated 
the state of the art 'National Laboratory for 
Advanced Material Characterization' during the 
occasion and expressed his satisfaction on 
creation of such unique centralized facility.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Dr. S.N . Jh a, ADG (PE) h ig h lig h te d  the 
achievements made by the institute in the 
re s e a rc h  d o m a in  and a p p la u d e d  th e 
accomplishment on revenue generation front.
Dr. K. K. Singh ADG (PE) and Directors of ICAR- 
CIAE, Bhopal, ICAR-NINFET, Kolkata and ICAR- 
CIPHET, Ludhiana were also present on the 
occasion and bestowed their wishes.
Former Directors of the institute Dr. K. R. K. Iyer, 
Dr. S. Sreenivasan and Dr. A. J. Shaikh were also 
present and shared their memories.
A mobile app on CIRCOT R-ABI was also launched 
to improve the ease of access to the potential 
Agripreneurs. The certificate for best employees 
among scientific, technical and administrative 
category were also accorded. The Corona 
warriors were also felicitated on the occasion.
C o m m u n a l H a r m o n y  w e e k
National Communal Harmony week being 
celebrated during 19t h  -  25t h  November, 2020. 
National Unity pledge was taken on 19t h  
November, 2020 by all staff with necessary 
COVID precautions
V ig ila n c e  A w a r e n e s s  w e e k
ICAR-CIRCOT observed Vigilance Awareness 
Week during 27t h  October to 02n d  November 2020 
with the theme "Vigilant India, Prosperous India". 
The Integrity Pledge was administered by Dr. P . G. 
Patil, Director to the staff of the Institute on 
27th  October 2020, following necessary COVID 
guidelines.A vigilance awareness lecture was delivered by 
Dr. Balsing K Rajput, Superintendent of Police, 
Maharashtra Cyber on 29t h  October 2020 to 
commemorate this occasion. Holding a doctoral 
degree from Tata Institute of Social Sciences and 
having strategic expertise in the field of 
cybersecurity, Dr. Rajput sensitized the audience 
about the need of vigilance in cyber related 
activities. He insisted the relevant of being 
vigilant in a research organization like ICAR- 
CIRCOT is to protect its Intellectual Property 
Rights and Intellectuals / Scientists. He elaborated 
various types of cyber-crimes with national & 
international examples. He stressed upon the 
requirement of security audit for Institute's 
website and online transactions. Also, he insisted 
to use only trusted / reliable / certified websites 
and apps (with limited permissions) for routine 
work. Finally, he summed up to rely more on 
social engineering than on technology to have 
secured transactions in this digital era.
C o n s t it u t io n  D a y
As part of continuation of Celebration of 
Constitution Day on the occasion of 70 t h  
Anniversary of adoption of constitution and
75

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
activities planned throughout the year up to 26t h  
November, 2020 the institute staff read the 
preamble of constitution of India and constitution 
duties along with their family members in their 
respective homes on 14t h  April 2020.
A m b e d k a r  J a y a n t i C e le b r a t io n
Birth Anniversary of Dr. B R Ambedkar was 
celebrated by garlanding Dr. Ambedkar's photo 
and lighting of a candle on 14^ April, 2020 by staff 
members who could reach the office during 
lockdown. As part of continuation of Celebration 
of 70t h  Anniversary of adoption of constitution 
staff members read the preamble of constitution 
of India and constitution duties along with their 
family members in their respective homes. Those 
who are in the staff quarters did it along with 
other staff members residing in the premises.
GTC conducted a tree plantation drive on 29t h  
September, 2020 and an online lecture on 
"Gandhian Philosophy on Agriculture" on 01s t  
October, 2020. Padma Shri Hon. Dr. Vikas 
Mahatme, Member of Parliament, Upper-house 
also planted a mango tree at GTC campus on 
01s t  October, 2020
In te r n a t io n a l W o m e n 's  D a y
As part of In te rn a tio n a l W om en's Day 
celebration, a lecture for ladies staff members 
was organized by the Internal Complaints 
Committee of the Institute on 11t h  March 2020. 
Advocate Ms. Mamta Bhatt delivered a lecture on
' W 3 3ft^T^ %
76Rcikui  -  Legal Rights Of Women At Home And In 
The O u tsid e  W orld And P re ve n tio n  Of 
H arassm ent In Dom estic And W orkplace 
Environment'. Different issues such as gender 
inequality, personal liberty, legal rights over 
ancestral and in-law property, importance of 
will, sexual harassment and prevention at 
home & workplace, use of social media for 
protection were discussed. Addressing the 
questions asked by the attendees, she said that 
women should act confidently and fearlessly in 
social life and also at her workplace. Women 
should always be vigilant and take decisions more 
practically in personal life.
On this occasion, women personnel who received 
awards for their outstanding performance during 
the year 2019 were honored.
W o r k s h o p  o n  G e n d e r  S e n s it iz a tio n
Workshop on Gender Sensitization was organized 
by ICAR on 15t h  December, 2020 to celebrate the 
seventh anniversary of notification of "the Sexual 
Harassment of women at workplace (prevention, 
prohibition and redressal) act 2013". Internal 
complaints committee of the institute along with 
HoDs, Lady Scientists, Lady Technical officers and 
Lady AAOs attended the programme online.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
11. Hindi Implementation
11.1 Hindi Day / Chetana Maas/ Hindi Pakhwada 2020 celebration
ICAR- CIRCOT celebrated Hindi Day on 14t h  
September 2021 and Hindi Fortnight during 14-28 
September 2021 along with Chetana Maas for full 
month of September in honour of Official 
Language Hindi. During this period, different 
competitions were organized such as Hindi Essay, 
Hindi writing, Unicode typing, Technical Writing in 
Hindi and Poster Presentation to promote Hindi 
language use. 'The contribution of CIRCOT 
technologies in making farmers self-reliant' was 
the theme of the Presentation; for which all the 
posters were presented in Hindi language. 
D espite the Covid -19 c ris is , there was 
enthusiastic participation from the employees for 
these competitions. The Chetna Maas was 
celebrated by using more and more Hindi in 
sign atu re, noting & d raftin g and o ffice 
correspondence.
On 14t h  September, the inauguration program was 
held under the chairmanship of Dr. P.G. Patil, 
Director, ICAR-CIRCOT. In his inaugural address, 
he said that all the languages of the country are 
important. But Hindi is accepted by masses as 
most of the Indians can speak, write and 
understand Hindi. The closing ceremony was on 
September 28, 2020. Director, in his presidential 
address said that it is our responsibility to use 
Hindi in our everyday work. He appreciated the in 
time activities of Official Language Hindi Cell for 
the im plem entation of Official Language. 
Dr. V. G. Arude, senior scientist and In-charge 
MPD, announced the winners. The E-certificates 
and the prize money in cashless form were 
distributed to the winners. Also, awards weregiven to those employees who participated and 
excelled in Hindi Incentive Scheme for year 
2019-20 for maximum drafting in Hindi in routine 
file work. Chal Vyjayanti Shield for excellent 
use of official language in office work for the 
year 2019-20 was awarded to Administration 
One (Personnel Section) in the Administrative 
c a te g o ry  and T ra n s fe r of T e c h n o lo g y  
Division in the Scientific Research category.
On 30t h  September, i.e., concluding day of Hindi 
Chetna Maas and also to commemorate the 
closing year of the 150t h  birth anniversary of 
Mahatma Gandhi, a combined workshop was 
organized with the topic; 'Father of the Nation 
Mahatma Gandhi and Hindi', in which Dr. Anant 
Shrim ali, form er Assistant Director, Hindi 
Teaching Scheme was invited. This workshop 
was conducted online from the institute's 
headquarters in w hich the o fficers and 
employees of the regional units at Nagpur, 
Dharwad, Guntur, Coimbatore, Sirsa and Surat 
also actively participated. Dr. Anant Shrimali 
in his address described how Gandhi is not 
just a name but an idea. Gandhi had an 
understanding of the ages. It was his foresight 
that he first understood the importance of Hindi 
in order to make the freedom struggle a pan India 
success. Hindi played an important role as an 
effective communication language to unite 
different provincial, different linguistic masses of 
India.
All the events were organized follow ing 
Covid-19 guidelines.
77

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Hindi week at GTC of ICAR-CIRCOT, Nagpur
Hindi Week was celebrated at Ginning Training 
Centre, ICAR-CIRCOT, Nagpur starting with Hindi 
Diwas i.e. 14t h  September, 2020. Hindi Week 
was inaugurated on 14t h  September, 2020 by 
Dr. S. K. Shukla, Officer in charge & Principal 
Scientist of the centre. The inauguration 
ceremony was held in the open lawn observing 
social distancing norms in accordance to the 
government's guidelines pertaining corona 
pandemic. In his presidential speech, Dr. S. K. 
Shukla stressed upon the importance of Hindi as 
the most spoken language in India. A large 
number of people of the nation speaks and 
understands Hindi. The numbers of Hindi news 
channels in our country surpass other languages
78elucidating that most of the people of the 
country use Hindi as a prim ary mode of 
communication. Hindi is one of the richest 
languages in vocabulary. After independence, the 
Constituent Assembly has declared Hindi as the 
official language of the country. He appealed 
to all employees of the centre to work in Hindi. In 
view of the corona pandemic, greater emphasis 
was given to oral competitions as compared to 
written competitions. Dr. Shukla briefed on the 
competitions to be held such as: singing/reciting 
poetry, proper guessing, word search, extempore 
speech etc. At the end of the programme, 
Dr. S.K. Shukla thanked all the employees of the 
centre for their cooperation in conducting Hindi 
Day. All GTC staff participated in various 
competitions enthusiastically.
The closing ceremony of the Hindi week was 
held on September 21, 2020. On this occasion, 
Dr. S.K. Shukla, Principal Scientist, presented a 
brief overview of the Hindi Week celebration 
organized in the Centre. In his concluding 
speech, he said that the orders received from 
Head O ffice and Town O fficial Language 
Im p le m e n ta tio n  C o m m ittee re late d  to 
implementation of official language policies are 
strictly complied in this centre. Throughout the 
year, training related to ginning, official work 
correspondence etc. is done in Hindi Language or 
bilingual. As a result, the Centre has completed 
the target of Hindi correspondence. The cash 
aw ard to the w in n in g  e m p lo y e e s w as 
announced by the Officer in charge.
The inauguration and closing ceremony of the 
Hindi Week was conducted by Mr. R. D. 
Shambharkar. At the end of the programme, he 
expressed his gratitude towards Director, 
CIRCOT, Mumbai and Officer Incharge, GTC as 
well as entire GTC staff who have assisted in 
making the programme a grand success.

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
11.2 Hindi Workshops
1. A Hindi workshop on working through ICAR e- 
office ( M U ^ .M ?  ^ - U % ^  %  HTMH ^  U l4 ) 
was organized for administrative staff of the 
institute from 11-2-2020 to 21-2-2020 and a 
total of 20 officers / employees participated 
in the workshop.
2. Dr. Mahendra Jain, Professor Hindi Teaching 
Scheme, CBD, Belapur conducted the Hindi 
workshop on the subject of Current Status 
and Future Of Hindi (ft^t %  cJhm f^fcT 
MfC^ (on 30-6-2020 for adm inistrative 
officers / employees. A total of 11 officers / 
employees took advantage of this.
3. Online Quarterly Hindi Workshop for the staff 
of the institute was held on 30-9-2020. Dr. 
Anant Shrimali, Asst. Director, Hindi Teaching 
Scheme, CBD, Belapur conducted the work 
shop on Father of the Nation Mahatma 
Gandhi And Hindi (M^ftdl H U M  M T tft 
ft^t) fo r all s c ie n tific , te ch n ica l and 
adm inistrative officers/em ployees. 57 
officers / employees attended the workshop.
4. Dr. Rajeshwar Uniyal, Ex. Deputy Director, 
(Official Language), CIFE, Mumbai Scheme, 
gave online lecture on the topic "Official 
Language Implementation Prospects inOnline System" (M4 M S ^ fcT  H W  MM
%wfcNH UMTCMD  on 18-12-2020, for all
administrative officers / staff and skilled 
support staff, 84 officers / employees took 
advantage of the workshop.
5. A workshop by Dr. Anant Srimali, former 
Assistant Director of the Department of 
Official Language, Government of India on 
the subject of "Father of the Nation Mahatma 
Gandhi and Hindi" was organized on the 
concluding day of Hindi Chetna Maas on 30t h  
September, 2020.
1 1 .3  M e e t in g s  o f t h e  O ffic ia l L a n g u a g e  
Im p le m e n t a tio n  C o m m it t e e
A total of 4 meetings were held during the year 
on the following dates.
1. 26-02-2020
2. 26-06-2020
3. 31-08-2020
4. 25-11-2020
C it y  O f f ic ia l L a n g u a g e  Im p le m e n t a t io n  
C o m m it t e e  M e e t in g
The director of the institute, Dr. P.G. Patil attended 
online meeting organized by Nagar Official 
Language Implementation Committee, Mumbai 
on 20-10-2020.
79

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
12. Distinguished Visitors
H o n ' b l e  M e m b e r  o f  P a r l i a m e n t  S h r i  
S a d a s h iv  K is a n  L o k h a n d e
Hon'ble Member of Parliament Shri Sadashiv 
Kisan Lokhande (a member of the 17t h  Lok Sabha) 
who represents the Shirdi, Karjat Vidhan Sabha 
constituency in Ahmednagar district Maharashtra 
visited ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai on 20t h  August, 
2020. He discussed about the Institute's mandate 
and cotton processing technologies in general. 
Director, ICAR-CIRCOT briefed him about the 
Institute and made him acquainted with 
technologies developed by the institute.
S h r i G . P. S h a r m a , D ir e c t o r  (F in a n c e ), IC A R
Shri G. P . Sharma, Director (Finance), ICAR, New 
Delhi visited ICAR-CIRCOT on 04t h  January, 2020 
and participated in the "One Day FMS Training 
cum Workshop" as Guest speaker.D r. Y. G . P r a s a d , D ir e c t o r , I C A R - C I C R ,  
N a g p u r
Dr. Y. G. Prasad, Director, ICAR-CICR, Nagpur 
visited ICAR-CIRCOT on 17t h  December, 2020.
D e le g a te s  fr o m  M iz o r a m
Nine members from Mizoram Agriculture, 
H o r tic u ltu r e , F o re stry  and M a rk e tin g  
Cooperative Society Ltd., visited ICAR-CIRCOT, on 
20t h  February, 2020. They visited Q uality 
Evaluation and Improvement Division and 
Mechanical Processing Division of the 
institute.
80

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
13. SWACHH BHARAT ABHIYAN
The Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, 
launched the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan , a nation­
wide programme on 2n d  October, 2014 to fulfill 
Mahatma Gandhi's vision of "Clean India". ICAR- 
CIRCOT, Mumbai is also making all efforts in 
implementing Swachh Bharat Mission of the 
Government of India. The various activities 
conducted during the year 2020 were as follows:
As a part of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and as per the 
instructions received from the council, acampaign called "Swachhta pakhawada" was 
launched in ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai and its 
regional stations from 16t h  December to 31s t  
December, 2020 by undertaking various activities 
like Swachhta pledge, organizing drawing 
competition, special drives on cleanliness, etc . 
During the programme the following activities 
were carried out:
Sl. No Date Activities
1. 16.12.2020 Display ofbanner at prominent places, taking Swachhata pledge, Stock 
taking & briefing of the activities to be organized during the Pakhwada, 
plantation of trees.
2. 17.12.2020 Basic maintenance: Stock taking on digitization of office records/ e-office 
implementation. Cleanliness drive including cleaning of offices, corridors 
and premises.
Review of progress on weeding out old records, disposing of old and 
obsolete furniture's, junk materials and white washing/painting.
3. 18.12.2020 Sanitation and SWM
Cleanliness and sanitation drive in the villages adopted under the 
MeraGaonMeraGauravPrggramme and/or other schemes by ICAR 
Institutes/KVKs involving village community. Reviewing the progress 
made under ongoing Swachhtaactivities including implementation of 
Swachhta Action Plan (SAP)& providing at the spot solutions.
4. 19.12.2020 Sanitation and SWM
Cleanliness and sanitation drive within campuses and surroundings 
including residential colonies, common market places. Stock taking of 
biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste disposal status and 
providing on the spot solutions.
5. 20.12.2020 Stock taking of waste management & other activities including utilization 
of organic wastes/ generation of wealth from waste, polythene free 
status, composting of kitchen and home waste materials. Promoting 
clean & green technologies and organic farming practices in kitchen 
gardens of residential colonies andat least one nearby village and 
proving on the spot technology solutions.
6. 21.12.2020 Campaign on cleaning of sewerage & water lines, awareness on recycling 
of waste water, water harvesting for agriculture/ horticulture 
application/kitchen gardens in residential colonies/ 1-2 nearby villages.
81

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
7. 22.12.2020 Organising Workshops, exhibitions, technology demonstrations on 
agricultural technologies for conversion of waste to wealth, safe disposal 
of all kinds of wastes. Debate on Swachhata at the DARE/ICAR 
establishments, Seminars, awareness camps, rallies, street plays and 
expert talks
8. 23.12.2020 Celebration of Special Day- KisanDiwas (Farmer's Day)-23 December 
inviting farmers. Experience sharing on Swachhata initiatives by farmers 
and civil society officials. Felicitating farmers/ civil society officials for 
exemplary initiatives on Swachhata.
9. 24.12.2020 Swachhta Awareness at local level (organizing Sanitation Campaigns 
involving and with the help of the farmers, farm women and village 
youth in new villages not adopted under any schemeby Institutes/ 
establishments.
10. 25.12.2020 Cleaning of public places, community market places and/or nearby 
tourist/selected spots.
11. 26.12.2020 Fostering healthy competition:Organising competition and rewarding 
best offices/ residential areas/ campuses on cleanliness. Quiz, essay & 
drawing competitions for school children, village youth.
12. 27.12.2020 Awareness on waste management & other activities including utilization 
of organic wastes/ generation of wealth from waste, polythene free 
status.Composting of kitchen and home waste materials,promoting 
clean & green technologies and organic farming practices in new area.
13. 28.12.2020 Campaign on cleaning of sewerage & water lines, awareness on recycling 
of waste water, water harvesting for agriculture/ horticulture 
application/kitchen gardens in residential colonies.Outside campuses/ 
nearby villages with the involvement of local/ village communities.
14. 29.12.2020 Visits of community waste disposal sites/ compost pits, cleaning and 
creating awareness on treatment & safe disposal of bio-degradable/ 
non-bio-degradable wastes by involving civil/ farming community.
15. 30.12.2020 Involvement of VIP/VVIPs in the Swachhta activities, Involvement of 
print and electronic media may be ensured so that adequate publicity is 
given to the SwachhtaPakhwada
16. 31.12.2020 Organization of press conference for highlighting the activities of Swachh 
Bharat Pakhwada by involving all stake holders including farmers/ VIPs/ 
press and electronic media.
On this occasion, on the first day i.e. on 16t h  
December, 2020, Director administrated the oath 
to all the staff to maintain cleanliness of their 
working places and residential premises. During 
this period, a special cleanliness drive a major 
cleanliness drive was arranged at Matunga, 
Mumbai. Under the "Swatchh Bharat Mission" a
82Swachhta Awareness campaign with emphasis on 
creating awareness on treatment and safe 
disposal of bio-degradable waste by involving civil 
community and visits of community wasted 
disposal sites / compost pits cleaning. Two 
community waste disposal place such as waste 
disposal place at Five garden and common

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
waste disposal place in L.N.Road, Matunga East, 
near Ramnarain Ruia Autonomous College were 
taken for this activities. A group comprising of 
Scientific, Technical, Supporting and contractual 
staff members of the Mechanical Processing 
Division of Institute were participated this 
activities. During this programme staff members 
were cleaned the community waste disposal area 
and made the instructions labels such as 
Biodegradable waste, non-biodegradable waste, 
dry waste, wet waste and pasted wherever 
required. Also, create the awareness to general 
public about the biodegradable and non­
biodegradable waste and advised to collect and 
segregate garbage and waste and dispose of 
accordingly.
In total, 16 cleanliness drives were covered during 
the pakhawada. All the staff members of ICAR- 
CIRCOT, Mumbai and its regional stations 
participated enthusiastically in all the cleaning 
programmes.
Ginning Training Centre, ICAR-CIRCOT, Nagpur 
conducted an awareness programme on clean 
cotton picking and benefits of maintaining 
cleanliness in surroundings at village Ghorad, 
Tah. Sello, district Wardha on Dec 18, 2020. 
A bout 25 farm ers from  v illa g e  G horad 
participated in this programme. On this occasion, 
scientists and technical officers from GTC of 
delivered lectures on ill effects of cotton 
contaminations that lowers the value of end 
products to a significant extent. Proper method 
for contamination free cotton picking was 
demonstrated to the farmers.
Also, a cleanliness drive was also taken up in this 
village by all the participants. The photographs 
taken, during the above mentioned activities 
conducted under "Swachh Bharat Abhiyan" in the 
institute, are attached below:Display of Banner in office premises
Display of Banner
Director administred the oath to 
maintain cleanliness
Cleanliness drive in Five Garden
83

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Aerobic composting of bio-degradable waste
Involvement of school children in 
Drawing competition
Cleaning programme at staff quarters 
premisesSwachhta awareness programme conducted 
by GTC, Nagpur
In addition to all these activities, the committee 
conducted cleanliness programme in the 
various divisions of the institute as listed below:
Sr.
No.DateDivision 
Participated in 
the Swachh 
Bharat Abhiyan
1 09/01/2020 Accounts
2 27/02/2020 QEID
3 07/03/2020 CBPD
4 28/10/2020 QEID
84

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
14. MERA GAON MERA GAURAV
Launched in 2015, the 'Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav1  
(MGMG) programme is one of the major initiatives 
of the government towards doubling the farm 
income by speeding up the "lab to land" process. 
Under this initiative, the ICAR-CIRCOT has identified 
and adopted 30 villages in Wardha district in 
Vidarbha region of Maharashtra. Six teams 
comprising four multidisciplinary scientists in each 
team have been formed and five villages allotted 
each team for implementation of the programme. 
Experience gained in the previous successive years 
was utilized to formulate the action plan for the year 
2020 for sustainable cotton production and 
doubling farm income in the adopted MGMG 
villages through regular interaction with farmers, 
organization of awareness programmes, field and 
technology demonstrations, kisan gosthis/meets, 
skill development and knowledge enhancement 
programmes. In addition, the interaction of experts 
roped in from other research institutes and 
organizations were also arranged for providing crop 
specific package of advices to the farmers, thus 
creating a linkage between farmers and research 
institutes, NGOs, state departments and industry.
In this extraordinary year 2020 of the COVID19 
pandemic, MGMG activities were also adversely hit 
to some extent. However, still the enthusiasm 
continued as before and the ICAR-CIRCOT 
conducted 2 webinars, 4 village visits, 14 interface 
meetings, 4 demonstrations and awareness 
programs in which about 370 farmers participated. 
Latest technologies, processes and products of the 
Institute were showcased during these programmes 
and various farming related issues were discussed. 
Farmers were enlightened through organisation of 
webinars about the norms and practices adopted by 
The CCI and The Cotton Federation for procurement 
of cotton on Minimum Support Price (MSP). 
Number of experts from the CCI, Farmer ProducersCompany and others delivered lectures and 
answered queries from the farmers. They were also 
explained about various cotton contaminants, 
which affect cotton quality and its export potential.
Other than COVID 19 situation this year, the farmers 
have also faced an unprecedented attack of Pink 
Bollworm (PBW) menace at a very early crop stage. 
Several farmers have suffered severe crop damage 
to the extent over 50% looses. Visits of experts from 
the sister organisations were arranged to minimize 
the damage and guide the farmers. Awareness 
Programmes and Field visits were also organised in 
the adopted villages in collaboration with the 
Confederation of Indian Textile Industry-Cotton 
Development a Research Association (CITI-CDRA) 
for controlling of the PBW .
At present, cotton contamination, particularly 
polypropylene is a major problem faced by cotton 
processing industry. Such contaminants enter in the 
cotton right during picking, transportation and 
storage by farmers. Demonstrations of different 
contaminants detected in spinning mills were 
arranged to farmers and the problems posed by 
each and every contaminant during cotton 
processing were explained. In addition, farmers 
were also educated about various other cotton 
quality parameters and appropriate cotton 
harvesting and storage practices.
An Awareness Programme was organized by GTC at 
Nagpur in association with ICAR-National Bureau of 
Soil Survey & Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP), 
Nagpur and ICAR-Central Citrus Research Institute 
(CCRI), Nagpur to educate the farmers about the 
Historical three Farm Acts recently passed by the 
Indian Parliament primarily to double the farm 
income and increase investment in the agriculture 
sector. About 100 farmers from almost all 30 
adopted villages participated in this programme.
85

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
A number of Scientists and Technical Officers from 
all the four local ICAR institutes and stake holders 
also participated in this programme. The chief guest 
of the program Hon. D r. Vikas Mahatme, Member of 
Parliament spoke in lengths about benefits of all the 
three newly enacted farm acts 2020. He explained 
that these Agri-acts would provide more sellingoptions to farmers, increase storage facilities of 
non-essential agricultural commodities and attracts 
big corporate houses to enter into contract farming 
with local farmers. On the occasion of world cotton 
day, five progressive farmers and a prominent 
textile mill entrepreneur were also felicitated.
Photos pertaining to activities undertaken by ICAR-CIRCOT under MGMG Programme in 2020
86

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
15. Infrastructural Facilities
ICAR-CIRCOT is well equipped with state-of-art 
research and testing facilities for conducting 
research in post-harvest processing of cotton and 
allied fibres.
Some of the facilities available in the Institute 
include
• Fibre, Yarn and Fabric Testing Laboratory
(With High Volume Instrument and Advanced  
Fibre Information System):  The laboratory 
has all the instruments for analysing the 
quality parameters of the Cotton and other 
fibres, yarn and fabrics. Besides research, this 
service is also provided to the Traders and 
other stakeholders in the cotton value chain.
• Nanocellulose Pilot Plant Facility : Capacity to 
produce 10 kg of Nanocellulose per day 
(Facility first of its kind in India): Service 
extended to Research organizatio n s, 
Industrial stakeholders for carrying out 
studies on application of nanocellulose.
• Other Unique research and instrumentation 
facility available at the institute include 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM); DREF 
Spinning Machines; Kawabata Evaluation 
System (KES); Atomic Force Microscopy 
(AFM); Thermo Gravimetric Analyser; Fourier 
Transformation Infrared Spectrometer; 
Atomic Absorption Spectrometer; Ultra High 
Pressure Homogenizer; Nano particle size 
analyser; Gas Chromatography with Mass 
Spectrometer:
• Electrospinning Facility
• Computerised sample Weaving Facility
• Composite Lab facility
• Modern Ginning and Pressing Plant• Cottonseed Processing Plant
• Particle Board Manufacturing Plant: One 
tonne per day production capacity plant is 
established in Nagpur. The facility is used by 
Incubatees to undertake scale up trials.
• Pelleting Plant
N ational Lab o rato ry for A d va n ce d  
M a te ria l C h a r a c t e r iz a tio n
"National Laboratory for Advanced Material 
Characterization (NLAMC)" established with the 
financial support from ICAR-National Agricultural 
Innovation Fund (NAIF), ICAR-Scheduled Caste 
Sub Plan (SCSP) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
-  Renumerative Approaches for Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors Rejuvenation (RKVY-RAFTAAR) 
Scheme, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (MoA&FW) New Delhi. This specific 
laboratory is proud enhancement to the facilities 
offered by ICAR-CIRCOT. The facility was virtually 
inaugurated by DDG (Engg.), ICAR on 3r d  
December, 2020. To support research, testing 
and incubation needs of start-ups, students, 
researchers, entrepreneurs and industries, the 
laboratory is adequately equipped with 
sophisticated instruments.
•  X-ray Diffractometer: It is widely used for the 
identification of unknown crystalline 
materials.
•  X-ray fluorescence spectrometer: It is 
applied for relatively non-destructive 
elemental and chemical analysis of different 
materials.
•  Weather-O-meter: It brings together all 
weather parameters and checks its impact 
on textiles and polymers for light fastness & 
durability properties.
87

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
•  Automatic single yarn tensile strength tester: 
It tests tensile strength & elongation, 
compression strength, and tearing strength 
of fabrics.
•  Particle size analyser: It determines the size 
of submicron and nano particles such as 
nano-cellulose, nano-silver, nano-zinc oxide, 
nano-sulphur, etc.
•  G oniom eter: It analyses the w etting 
properties of a surface and records the 
interfacial tension, contact angle, surface 
energy of different materials.
•  Polarized light microscope: It can be utilized 
for both quantitative and qualitative studies 
of wide range of anisotropic specimens like 
natural and textile fibres and polymers.Instruments/Equipment/ facilities procured  
during the year.
• O z o n e  S y s te m
Under BNPM sponsored project, Ozone 
system capable of disinfecting the water used 
for pulping was established
• T h e r m o  G r a v im e tr ic  A n a ly s e r
•  Security Feature Detection System :  It is used 
in the qualitative and quantitative analysis of 
substances in trace amounts on different 
matrices such as cloth, security paper, fiber 
etc., without extensive sample preparation 
in a non-destructive manner.
•  With an ardent commitment to evolve with 
the times, the "National Laboratory for 
Advanced Material Characterization" is 
ready to meet all intricate research demands 
with clockwork precision and seamless 
quality.• S e c u r it y  F e a tu re  D e te c tio n  S y s te m
88

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Annexure 1
Ongoing Research Projects
Institute Funded Projects
S. No. Title Investigators Duration
Core Area 1 : Pre-Ginning and Ginning
1 . Development of an Efficient system for processing of 
kawadi cotton in ginneriesS. V. Ghadge (PI) 2018-21
2. Development of a Rotary Tubular Drum Dryer for 
Quarantine of Pink Bollworm infested Cottonseeds in 
GinneriesS. K. Shukla (PI)
V. G. Arude 
Archana Mahapatra2018-21
3. Development of Digital Ginning Percent Indicator for 
Portable Cotton GinsV. G. Arude (PI) 
S. K. Shukla 
P. S. Deshmukh2020-22
4. Assessment of suitability of adoption of seed cotton 
contamination cleaner for contamination and trash 
control in Indian ginning industryV. G. Arude (PI) 
S. K. Shukla 
S. S. Kautkar2020-22
5. Device for seed cotton ginning percentage measurement P. S. Deshmukh (PI) 
V. G. Arude 
M . K. Mahawar2020-23
6. Optimization of groove profile and diameter of chrome 
leather roller for enhancing the performance of double 
roller ginS. S. Kautkar (PI) 
S. K. Shukla 
S. V. Ghadge 
V. G. Arude2020-21
Core Area II: Mechanical Processing, Technical Textiles and Composites
7. Evaluation of spinnability and form ulation of guidelines 
for spinning of recycled fibre from fabric waste and 
develop value added productsT. Senthilkumar(PI) 
G. Krishna Prasad 
V. G. Arude 
A. S. M . Raja2020-23
8. Development of cellulosic nanofibre based micronutrient 
delivery system for urban farmingG. T. V. Prabu (PI) 
T. Senthilkumar 
N . Vigneshwaran2020-22
9. Development of filter fabric for indoor decontamination Kirti Jalgaonkar (PI) 
P. Jagajanantha2020-22
10. Development of Composite Material based Sanitary C Pad Dattatreya M  Kadarn (PI) 
P. Jagajanantha2018-21

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Core Area III: Characterisation of Cotton and other Natural Fibres, Yarns and Textiles
11. AICRP on Cotton (Quality Research) P.K. Mandhyan (PI) 
A. Arputharaj 
P. Jagajanantha2017-21
12. Development of Marker Fibres: A Tool for traceability of 
cotton textilesA. Arputharaj (PI) 
P.K. Mandhyan 
G. Krishna Prasad2018-21
Core Area IV: Chemical and Biological Processing, Biomass and By-products Utilisation
13. Toxicological and Environmental impact of ICAR-CIRCOT's 
nanomaterials (Nanocellulose, Nanosilver and Nano-ZnO)N . Vigneshwaran (PI) 
A. K. Bharimalla 
A. S. M . Raja 
A. Arputharaj 
Kanika Sharma2020-22
14. Development of a healthier cottonseed based cooking oil 
by blending with other vegetable oilsSujata Saxena (PI) 
Manoj Kumar 
Kanika Sharma2020-22
Core Area V: Entrepreneurship and Human Resource Development
15. Development of Nanocellulose based Edible Coating for 
Fruits and VegetablesArchana Mahapatra (PI) 
A. K. Bharimalla 
Manoj Kumar 
Jyoti Dhakane-Lad 
Sharmila Patil2019-21
16. Refinement and popularisation of nutrient-enriched 
compost production from cotton micro-dustK. Pandiyan (PI) 
S. K. Shukla 
S. S. Kautkar2020-22
17. Development of process protocol for synthesis of nano­
sulphur and its application in agricultureM . K. Mahawar (PI) 
A. K. Bharimalla
N . Vigneshwaran 
A. Arputharaj2020-23
18. Impact Assessment of CIRCOT technologies C. Sundaramoorthy (PI) 
A. K. Bharimalla 
Himanshu Chaurasia2020-25
Consortia Research Platform (CRP) on Natural Fibres
19. Development of cotton incorporated Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) body suit with smart respirator for 
healthcare workers with enhanced comfortP. K. Mandhyan (PI) 
A. Arputharaj 
A. S. M . Raja 
P. Jagajanantha 
Kirti Jalgaonkar2020-22

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
S. No. Title (Funding Agency) Investigators Duration
20. Development of Cotton Based face mask with improved 
particle filtration efficiency and breathability using 
electro spun nano materials and antiviral coatings -A. S. M . Raja (PI)
T. Senthilkumar 
G. Krishna Prasad 
G. T. V. Prabu 
N . Vigneshwaran 
C. Sundaramoorthy 
A. K. Bharimalla 
P. K. Mandhyan2020-22
Externally Funded Projects
S. No. Title (Funding Agency) Investigators Duration
21. Agri Business Incubation Centre at ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai (NAIF -Incubation Fund)A. K. Bharimalla (PI) 
S. K. Shukla 
N . Vigneshwaran 
P. K. Mandhyan 
V. G. Arude 
C. Sundaramoorthy2015-21
22. An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Sustainable Cotton 
Marketing in the State of Maharashtra (NASF)C. Sundaramoorthy (PI) 
G. Krishna Prasad2018-21
23. Valorisation of Cottonseed Meal: Extraction of Quality 
Protein for improving the Livelihood of Cotton Farmers 
(DSDManoj Kumar (PI) 
Sujata Saxena2019-21
24. Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied 
Sectors Rejuvenation (RAFTAAR)Agribusiness Incubation 
Centre (R-ABI)
(DAC&FW)A. K. Bharimalla (PI) 
C. Sundaramoorthy 
P. S. Deshmukh 
V. G. Arude 
P. K. Mandhyan 
N . Vigneshwaran 
Sharmila Patil 
S. K. Shukla2019-21
25. Application of Irradiation for Extraction of Protein from 
Deoiled Cotton Cake & By Product Utilization (BRNS)D . M . Kadam (PI) 
Sharmila Patil 
Manoj Kumar 
N . Vigneshwaran2020-23
26. Development of biocompatible nano-clay polymer 
composites and nanoparticles with reference to 
retention and release of iron and zink in Grape (Vitis 
Vinifera L.) (Inter institutional project with ICAR-NRCG, 
Pune)P. K. Mandhyan (PI) 
Sharmila Patil2020-23

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
A nnexure II
PERSONNEL
(As on December 31, 2020)
DIRECTOR
Dr. P . G. Patil
M. Tech. (P.H.E.), Ph.D. (Engg.), F.T.A., FISAE., FIE.
HQ, MUMBAI
1 . D r. (Smt.) Sujata Saxena, M.Sc., Ph.D.
(Organic Chemistry)
Head i/c, Chemical and Biochemical Processing 
Division
2. D r. Dattatreya M . Kadam, M .Tech (ASPE), Ph.D
3. D r. A. S. M . Raja, M . Sc., Ph.D.
(Textile Chemistry)4. D r. P . K. Mandhyan, M.Sc., Ph.D., A.T.A (Tech. 
Textiles) Head i/c, Quality Evaluation and 
Improvement Division
5. D r. N . Vigneshwaran, M.Sc. (Agri.), M.B.A., Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Microbiology)
SENIOR SCIENTIST
1 . D r. (Mrs.) Jyoti M . Nath, M.Sc., Ph.D. 
(Electronics & Instrumentation)
2. D r. A. K. Bharimalla, M . Tech., Ph.D. 
(Composite)
Head i/c, Technology Transfer Division
3. D r. P . S. Deshmukh, M . Tech., Ph.D., FIE. 
(Farm Machinery & Power)4. D r. C. Sundaramoorthy, M.Sc., Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Economics)
5. D r. V . G. Arude, M . Tech. Ph.D.
(Farm Machinery & Power), Head i/c, MPD
SCIENTIST
1 . D r. A. Arputharaj, M.Sc., M . Tech., Ph.D.
(Textile Chemistry)
2. D r. T . Senthilkumar, M . Tech., Ph.D.
(Textile Manufacture)
3. D r. G. Krishna Prasad, M . Tech., Ph.D.
(Textile Tech.)
4. D r. Jalgaonkar Kirti Ramesh, M.Sc. (PHT), Ph.D., 
(Agricultural Structures and Process 
Engineering)
5. D r. Manoj Kumar Mahawar, M .Tech. Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Structures and Process 
Engineering)
6. Shri G. T . V . Prabu, M . Tech. (Textile Tech.)7. D r. P . Jagajanantha, M . Tech., Ph.D.
(Textile Tech.)
8. D r. (Smt.) Sharmila Patil, M.Sc. (P.H.T.), Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Process Engineering)
9. D r. (Smt.) Archana Mahapatra, M.Tech., Ph.D 
(Agricultural Process Engineering)
10. D r. Manoj Kumar, M.Sc., Ph.D.
(Plant Biochemistry)
11. E r. (Smt.) Jyoti Dhakane- Lad, M.Sc. (PHT)
12. D r. Kanika Sharma, M.Sc., Ph.D.
(Plant Biochemistry)
13. Shri Himanshu Shekhar Chourasia, M.Sc. 
(Computer Application & IT)
92

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
GTC, NAGPUR
PRINCIPAL SCIENTIST
1 . D r. S. K . Shukla, M . Tech., Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Process Engineering) 
Officer-In-Charge, GTC
1 . D r. K. Pandian, M.Sc. Ph.D. 
Agricultural Microbiology)
2. E r. (Ms.) Varsha Satankar, M .Tech. 
(Agricultural Structures and Process 
Engineering) (On study leave)2. D r. S. V . Ghadge, M.E. (Ag.) M.B.A., Ph.D. 
(Farm Machinery & Power)
SCIENTIST
3. D r. Kautkar Sheshrao Sakharam, M.Sc. Ph.D. 
(Agricultural Structures and Process 
Engineering)
HQ, MUMBAI
CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER
1 . D r. (Smt.) Sheela Raj, M.Sc., Ph.D. 6. Shri G. B. Hadge, M.Sc.
2. D r. (Smt.) Sudha Tiwari, M.Sc., Ph.D. 7. D r. M . V . Vivekanandan, M.Sc., Ph.D.
3. Shri T . Venugopal, B.E. 8. Shri S. Banerjee, M.Sc.
4. D r. (Smt.). N . M . Ashtaputre, M.Sc., Ph. D . 9. Shri B. R . Pawar, M . Sc., LL.M.
5. Shri R . S. Prabhudesai, M.Sc., D.C.M. 10.Shri R. K . Jadhav, M.Sc.
ASSISTANT CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER
1 . Shri R . R . Chhagani, M.Sc. 6. Smt. P . S. Nirhali, M.Sc.
2. Shri H . S. Koli, M.Sc., LL.B. 7. Shri S. V . Kokane, M.A.
3. D r. (Smt.) S. R. Kawlekar, M.Sc., P.I.M.R., Ph.D. 8. Shri D . U . Kamble, B.Sc.
4. Shri P . N . Sahane, D .I.F.T. 9. E r. Chandrika Ram, M . Tech.
5. Shri K. Narayanan, B.Sc. (APFE) (on deputation)
SENIOR TECHNICAL OFFICER
1 .Smt. Binu Sunil, M.Sc. 4. Shri R. S. Narkar, M.Sc., D.C.I.A.
2. Smt. Bindu Venugopal, M.Sc. 5. Smt. P . R . Mhatre, B.Sc., M.Lib.
3. D r. (Ms.) C. P . D ' Souza, M.Sc., Ph.D. 6. Smt. C. D . Prabha, M.Sc.
TECHNICAL OFFICER
1 .Shri V . D . Kalsekar, B.Sc. 4. Shri S. N . Patil, B.E. (Civil)
2. Shri C. V . Shivgan, Cert. Elec. Supr. PWD, Cert. M . 5. Shri N. D . Kambli, M.Sc.
& A.W . Technician 6. Shri D . M . Correia, I.T.I., N .C.T.V .T. (Mechanic)
3. Shri M . G. Ambare, M.Sc.
SENIOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANT
1 . Smt. H . R . Pednekar, B.A., B.Lib
2. Shri R . P . Kadam, M.Sc.
3. Smt. M . P . Kamble, B.A., M.Lib.4. Shri A. R. Jadhav, B.Sc.
5. Shri Krishna Bara, D .H .T.
93

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
TECHNICAL ASSISTANT
1 . Shri D . A.Salaskar, Driver 4. Shri D . M . Raje
2. Shri P . P . Thakur 5. Shri R. R. Gosai
3. Shri P . G. Gavhale
SENIOR TECHNICIAN
1 . Shri Mahabir Singh 4. Shri S. G. Phalke
2. Shri S. V . Kokane, Driver 5. Shri D . J. Dhodia
3. Shri M . M . Kadam 6. Shri Yogesh Nagpure
GTC, NAGPUR
CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER
1. E r. D . U . Patil, B. Tech. (Agril. Engg.)
ASSISTANT CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER
1 . Shri U . D . Devikar, M.Sc. 2. Shri S. L. Bhanuse, M.Sc.
SENIOR TECHNICAL OFFICER
1. Shri R. G. Dhakate, B.Sc.
TECHNICAL OFFICER
1. Shri B .V . Shirsath, B.A., I.T .I
TECHNICAL ASSISTANT
1 . Shri S. K. Parab, Cert. Cot. Spin.
QE UNIT, COIMBATORE
1 . Shri K . Thiagarajan, M.Sc., (Chief Technical Officer) 2. Shri M . Bhaskar, Dip. Ref. & Air-Cond., (Technical Officer)
QE UNIT, DHARWAD
1 . Smt. V . G. Udikeri, M.Sc., Technical Officer
QE UNIT, GUNTUR
1 . Shri C. M . More, M.Sc. (Asst. Chief Technical Officer)  2. Shri S. N . Hedau, B.Sc. (Asst. Chief Technical Officer)
QE UNIT, SIRSA
1. D r. Hamid Hasan, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Chief Technical Officer)
2. D r. Jal Singh, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Senior Technical Officer)
3. Shri Umrao Meena (Senior Technician)
QE UNIT, SURAT
1 . Shri M . B. Patel, B.Sc., L.L.B, (Senior Technical Officer)
94

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF  
HQ, MUMBAI
SR. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER :  Shri Sunil Kumar, B.A. (Hons.) 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER :  Smt. Sujata Koshy, B.Com.
FINANCE & ACCOUNTS OFFICER :  Shri M . Radhakrishnan
ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
1. Smt. T . P . Mokal, M.A.(Hindi) 4. Smt. N . M . Deshmukh, M.A., LL.B.
2. Shri K. Parleshwar, HSc 5. Shri S. D . Ambolkar
3. Shri S. A. Telpande, M.Com.
ASSISTANT FINANCE & ACCOUNTS OFFICER:
Shri. S. V . Kasabe, B.Com, L.L.B.
1. Kum. Pooja Tiwari, B.Sc.
2. Kum. Himani P . Singh, B.E.
3. Shri P . V . Jadhav
1 . Shri V . M . Sable
2. Smt. J. R. Chavkute
3. Smt. B. D . Kherodkar
4. Shri S. S. AnganeASSISTANT
4. Smt. S. P . Paiyala
5. Smt. S. G. Parab, B.A. (Sociology), B.A. (Hindi)
UPPER DIVISION CLERK
5. Shri T . D . Dhamange, B.Com.
6. Shri S. N . Bandre
7. Smt. V . N . Walzade, B.A
LOWER DIVISION CLERK
1. Shri Avinash Aman, B. Tech. 2. Shri S. N . Sahane
PRIVATE SECRETARY :  Smt. U . N . Bhandari 
PERSONAL ASSISTANT :  Smt. R. R. Tawde, B.Com 
STENOGRAPHER :  Smt. V . R. Naik, B.A.
GTC, NAGPUR
ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER :  Shri Y . R. Pathare, B.Sc., M.B.A. 
LOWER DIVISION CLERK :  Shri R. G. Matel,
PERSONAL ASSISTANT :  Shri R. D . Shambharkar, M.A.
SKILLED SUPPORT STAFF  
HQ, MUMBAI
1 .Shri M . J. Sumra 8. Shri R. P . Karkate
2. Shri K. T . Mahida 9. Shri S. B. Worlikar
3. Shri H . B. Vesmiya 10.Shri D . G. Gole
4. Shri M . M . Katpara 11.Shri M . K. Prabhulkar
5. Shri S. K. Bobate 12.Shri J. D . Sakpal
6. Shri P . P . Patil 13.Shri V . Murugan
7. Shri R. G. Tak 14.Shri S. D . Magar
95

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
22. Shri S. S. Surkule
23. Shri D . R. Gawde
24. Shri S. M . Chandanshive
25. Shri P . E . Gurav
26. Shri Mahesh C. Solanki
27. Shri Thapa Gorkha Bahadur Ovilal
GTC, NAGPUR
Shri R. B. Kautkar 
Shri R. S. Umare 
Smt. M . M . Bhandakkar
QE UNIT, COIMBATORE
Shri V . Subbaiah
QE UNIT, DHARWAD
Shri A. F. Gudadur
QE UNIT, SURAT
Shri M . G. Sosa
0  D r. (Ms.) Kanika Sharma, Scientist (Plant Biochemistry) joined on 4t h  April, 2020 
0  Shri Himanshushekhar Chourasia, Scientist (Computer Application & IT) joined on 4t h  April, 2020
PROMOTIONS
Sr.
No.Name of Staff Grade to which Promoted Effective Date of  
Promotion
1. Shri T Venugopal Chief Technical Officer 05-11-2016
2. Shri M . Mukundan Chief Technical Officer 03-02-2017
3. Shri S. M. Gogate Assistant Chief T echnical Officer 01-07-2014
4. Shri K. Narayanan Assistant Chief T echnical Officer 17-05-2015
5. Shri R. G. Dhakate Assistant Chief T echnical Officer 01-01-2017
6. Shri D. U. Kamble Assistant Chief T echnical Officer 10-06-2018
7. Shri S. D. Ambolkar Assistant Administrative Officer 27-10-2020
8. Smt. S. G. Parab Assistant 23-10-2020
9. Smt. V. N. Valzade Upper Division Clerk 23-10-2020
10. Smt. U . N. Bhandari Private Secretary 01-12-2020
11. Smt. R. R. Tawade Personal Assistant 23-10-2020
12. Shri R. D. Shambharkar Personal Assistant 01-12-202015. Shri Sunil R. Tondse
16. Shri V . B. Poojari
17. Shri S. P . Naik
18. Shri M . N . Kamble
19. Smt. Kamala Murugan
20. Shri D . K . Kasar
21. Shri Suhas R. Tondse
APPOINTMENTS
96

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
TRANSFERS
Scientists
Dr. Santanu Basak, Scientist transferred from ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai to ICAR-NINFET, Kolkatta w.e.f. 
7 *  h  August, 2020.
Technical
Shri K. Thiagarajan, Chief Technical Officer transferred from Guntur to Regional QE Unit, Coimbatore w. 
e. f. 5 *  h  March 2020
Shri Paresh P . Thakur, Technical Assistant transferred from ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai to GTC, Nagpur 
5 *  h  March 2020
Shri S. K. Parab, Technical Assistant transferred from GTC, Nagpur to ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai w. e. f. 
5 *  h  March 2020
Shri S. N. Hedau, Assistant Chief Technical Officer transferred from GTC, Nagpur to Regional QE Unit 
Guntur w. e. f. 5 * h  March 2020
Shri C. M. More, Assistant Chief Technical Officer transferred from ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai to Regional QE 
Unit Guntur w. e. f. 19*h  October, 2020
Shri C. V. Shivgan, Technical Officer transferred from GTC, Nagpur to ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai w. e. f. 
19*h  October, 2020
Administrative
Shri Y . R. Pathare, Assistant Administrative Officer transferred from ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai to GTC, 
Nagpur w. e. f. 19*h  October, 2020
Shri S. A. Telpande, Assistant Administrative Officer transferred from GTC, Nagpur to ICAR-CIRCOT, 
Mumbai w. e. f. 19*h  October, 2020
RETIREMENTS
1. Shri C. J. Bagalkoti, Skilled Support Staff at Dharwad unit superannuated on 31-01-2020
2. Dr. S. K. Chattopadhyay, Principal Scientist superannuated on 29-02-2020
3. Dr. R. D. Nagarkar, Chief Technical Officer superannuated on 31-03-2020
4. Shri. S. Mukundan, Chief Technical Officer at Coimbatore unit superannuated on 30-06-2020
5. Shri R. K. Pallewad, Assistant Administrative Officer superannuated on 31-07-2020
6. Smt. T. T. D'Souza, Personal Assistant superannuated on 31-08-2020
7. Shri M. Z. Rathi, Skilled Support Staff superannuated on 30-11-2020
8. Smt. S. D. Dudam, Private Secretary superannuated on 30-11-2020
9. Shri G. B. Hadge, Chief Technical Officer superannuated on 31-12-2020
10. Shri R. R. Gosai, Technical Assistant superannuated on 31-12-2020
97

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Annexure III
LIST OF COMMITTEES
Institute Management Committee (IMC)
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. S.N. Jha,
Dr. Abhijit Kar,
Dr. G. Balasubramani,
Dr. Vilas Kharche,
Dr. L. K. Nayak,
Shri D. B. Sawale Patil,
Dr. (Smt.) Sujata Saxena, 
Shri Sunil Kumar,Director, Chairman 
ADG (PE), ICAR, New Delhi
Principal Scientist, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Principal Scientist,
ICAR-Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur 
Director of Research, Dr. PDKV, Akola 
Principal Scientist, ICAR- NINFET, Kolkata 
ex-MLA, Buldhana, Maharashtra 
Principal Scientist, ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai 
Sr. AO, Member Secretary
Research Advisory Committee (RAC)
Dr. N. C. Patel,
Dr. M. K. Sharma,
Prof. (Dr.) U . J. Patil,
Dr. N.N. Mahapatra,
Prof. (Dr.) S. R. Shukla, 
Dr. Narendra G. Shah, 
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. S. N. Jha,Former VC, JAU & AAU, Chairman 
CEO, M/s. Bajaj Steel Industries Ltd, Nagpur 
Head, Department of Textiles D.K.T.E., Ichalkaranji 
Business Head (Dyes)
SHREE PUSHKAR CHEMICALS & FERTILISERS LTD.
Former Professor, ICT, Mumbai
Professor, IIT  Mumbai
Director, ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai
ADG (PE), ICAR, New Delhi
Proj'ect Monitoring and Evaluation Committee (PMC)
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. (Smt.) S. Saxena, 
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan, 
Dr. A.K. Bharimalla, 
Dr. V.G. Arude,
Dr. A.S. M. Raja,Director, Chairman 
In-charge Head, CBPD 
In-charge Head, QEID 
In-charge, TTD 
in-charge MPD
in-charge PME Cell, Member secretary
Priority-setting, Monitoring & Evaluation (PME) Committee
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Dr. A.K. Bharimalla,
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan,
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran,
Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy,Principal Scientist, In-charge 
Senior Scientist 
Principal Scientist 
Principal Scientist 
Sr. Scientist
98

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Priority-setting, Monitoring & Evaluation (PME) Cell
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Shri GTV Prabu,
Shri K. Narayanan, 
Smt. H. R . Pednekar, 
Shri Anand R  Jadhav,Principal Scientist, In-charge
Scientist, Nodal Officer, PME
ACTO
STA
STA
Institute Technology Management Committee (ITMC)
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. P. K. Mandhyan,
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy, 
Dr. B.B. Nayak,
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran,
Dr. A.K. Bharimalla,Director, Chairman
Principal Scientist, I/c. Head, QEID
Principal Scientist, CBPD
Senior Scientist, Member Secretary of IRC
Principal Scientist, CIFE, Mumbai
Principal Scientist, CBPD
Senior Scientist,Officer -In-charge ITM U, Member Secretary
Institute Technology Management Unit (ITMU)
Dr. A.K. Bharimalla,
Dr. N. Vigneshwaran,
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan,
Dr. M.V. Vivekanandan, 
Shri G.B. Hadge,Senior Scientist, Officer-In-charge
Principal Scientist
Principal Scientist
CTO, TTD
CTO, TTD
Institute Joint Staff Council
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. P.S. Deshmukh,
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Shri S. V. Kasabe,
Dr. (Smt.) S. S. Patil,
Shri B . R . Pawar,
Shri Mahavir Singh,
Shri Yogesh Nagpure,
Smt. Smita Paiyala,
Smt. Bharati Kherodkar,
Shri S. D. Magar,
Shri Sudhakar Chandanshive, 
Shri P.V. Jadhav,
Shri M K Prabhulkar,
Shri Y. Pathare,Director, Chairman 
Sr. Scientist
Senior Administrative Officer 
A. F  & AO, Office side member 
Scientist, Office side member 
ACTO, Office side member 
Sr. Technician 
Technical Assistant 
Assistant 
UDC
SSS, staff side member 
SSS, staff side member 
Assistant, CJSC Member 
Secretary, IJSC 
AAO, Member Secretary
99

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Internal Complaints Committee
Dr. (Smt.) S. Saxena, 
Smt. Shilpa Charankar,
Dr. P. S. Deshmukh,
Smt. Sujatha Koshy,
Dr. (Smt.) N. Ashtaputre, 
Smt. P . R . Mhatre,
Smt. Sujatha Koshy,Principal Scientist, In-charge Head, CBPD, Chairperson
Former Principal, Dr. BNM college of Home science,
Matunga, External Member
Senior Scientist, Member
AO, Member
CTO, Member
STO, Member
AO , Member Secretary
Staff Welfare Fund Committee
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan, 
Shri D.U. Kamble, 
Shri S.V. Kasabe, 
Shri P.V. Jadhav, 
Smt. Sujatha Koshy,Principal Scientist, Chairman 
ACTO, Member 
AF&AO, Member 
Assistant, Member 
AO, Member Secretary
ISO-9001:2015 Management Committee
Dr. P.G. Patil,
Dr. (Smt.) S. Saxena,
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan,
Dr. A.K. Bharimalla,
Dr, V.G. Arude,
Shri. Sunil Kumar,
Shri. S. Radhakrishnan, 
Dr. A.S.M. Raja,
Dr. A. Arputharaj,
Purchase Committee
Dr. P. K. Mandhyan,
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla,
Dr. G. Krishna Prasad, 
Dr. P. Jagajanantha, 
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Shri. M. Radhakrishnan, 
Smt.Sujatha Koshy,
M r. K. P . Parleshwar,Director, Chairman
Principal Scientist, Head In-charge, CBPD, Member 
Principal Scientist, In-charge Head, QEID, Member 
Senior Scientist, Head In-charge, TTD, Member 
Senior Scientist, In-charge Head, MPD, Member 
Senior AO, Member 
FAO, Member
Principal Scientist, Management Representative 
Scientist, Deputy Management Representative
Principal Scientist & in-charge Head CBPD, Chairman
Senior Scientist, TTD, Member
Scientist, MPD, Member
Scientist, QEID, Member
SAO, Member
FAO, Member
AO, Member
AAO, Member Secretary
Technical Evaluation Committee
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Dr. Senthilkumar,
Dr. P. Jagajanantha, 
Smt. Sujatha Koshy,
100Principal Scientist, Chairman 
Scientist, Member 
Scientist, Member 
AO, Member Secretary

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Swachhata Mission Committee
Dr. P. G. Patil,
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Shri S. V. Kasabe,
Shri Sharad V. Kokane, 
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla,
Dr. G. Krishna Prasad, 
Dr. Nishant D. Kambli,Director, Chairman
Principal Scientist, Member
Senior Administrative Officer, Member
AFAO, Member
Security Officer, Member
Senior Scientist, Member
Scientist, Member
Technical Officer, Member Secretary
Rajbhasha Karyanvayan Committee
Dr. P. G. Patil,
Dr. (Smt.) S. Saxena,
Dr. P. K. Mandhyan,
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla,
Dr. V. G. Arude,
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Smt. S. Koshy,
Shri M . Radhakrishnan, 
Shri S. V. Kasabe,
Smt. P . R . Mhatre,
Shri S. A. Telpande,
Shri K. Parleshwar,
Smt. N. Deshmukh,
Shri S. D. Ambolkar, 
Smt. T.P. Mokal,
Works Committee
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla, 
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Dr. A. Arputharaj,
Shri B.R. Pawar,
Shri S. V. Kasabe,
Er. T . Venugopal,Director, Chairman
Principal Scientist, in-charge Head CBPD, Member
Principal Scientist, in-charge Head QEID, Member
Senior Scientist, in-charge, TTD, Member
Senior Scientist, in-charge, MPD, Member
Senior Administrative Officer, Member
AO, Member
FAO, Member
A F  & AO, Member
Senior Technical Officer, Member
AAO, Member
AAO, Member
AAO, Member
AAO, Member
AAO, Member Secretary
Sr. Scientist & in-charge Head TTD, Chairman 
Senior Administrative Officer, Member 
Scientist, Member 
CTO, Member 
A. F  & AO, Member
Officer in-charge Engg., Member Secratary
Test Fee Revision Committee
Dr. (Smt.) S. Saxena, 
Dr. P.K. Mandhyan, 
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla, 
Dr. V. G. Arude,
Dr. Senthil Kumar, 
Shri B . R . Pawar,
Smt. P . S. Nirhali,Principal Scientist & in-charge Head, CBPD, Chairperson
Principal Scientist and In-charge Head, QEID, Member
Senior Scientist and In-charge Head TTD, Member
Senior Scientist, HoD In-charge, MPD, Member
Scientist, Member
CTO, Member
ACTO, Member Secretary
101

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
Grievance Committee
Dr. P. G. Patil, Director, Chairman
Nominated Members
Dr. P. K. Mandhyan, 
Shri Sunil Kumar, 
Shri S. V. Kasabe, 
Shri. Y. R . Pathare,
Elected MembersPrincipal Scientist
SAO
FAO
AAO (Member Secretary)
Dr. P.S. Deshmukh, 
Shri B . R . Pawar,
Smt. Smita P. Paiyala, 
Shri. Mahesh Solanki,Senior Scientist (Scientific Category) 
ACTO (Technical Category)
UDC (Administrative Category)
S. S. S (Skilled Supporting Staff Category)
ABI Advisory Committee
Dr. P. G. Patil,
Dr. R. P. Kachru,
Dr. S. Sreenivasan, 
Prof. Narendra Shah, 
Dr. M. K. Sharma,
Dr. A. K. Bharimalla,Director, Chairman
Former ADG (PE), ICAR, New Delhi, Member 
Former Director, ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai, Member 
CTARA, IIT , Mumbai, Member 
Whole Time Director & CEO,
Bajaj Steel Industries Limited, Nagpur, Member 
Sr. Scientist, Principal Investigator: 
ICAR-CIRCOT-ABI Centre, Member-Secretary
RAFTAAR-Incubation Committee (RIC) Members of CIIRCOT RABI
Dr. P. G. Patil,
Dr. G. R . Anap,
Prof. (Dr.) V. D. Gotmare, 
Prof. (Dr.) A. S. Vastrad,
Shri. D. B. Bote,
M r. Ramesh. R  Kadam,
Dr. Ashok K. Bharimalla,Director, Chairman
Former International Cotton Consultant, World Bank Project (Africa) 
Former HOD, Textile Manufacture Department, VJTI, Mumbai 
Professor and Dy. Director, Student Welfare,
University of Agricultural Science (UAS), Dharwad 
Joint Director Agriculture, Commissionerate of Agriculture, Pune 
RTD, General Manager, Bank of India, Member 
(Representative of Bank)
Senior Scientist, PI-CEO: CIRCOT-R-ABI, Member Secretary
CRP on Natural Fibres Project Implementation Unit
Dr. P. G. Patil,
Dr. A. S. M . Raja,
Dr. C. Sundaramoorthy, 
Shri Sunil Kumar,
Shri M Radhakrishnan, 
Smt. Sujatha Koshy,
Shri S. V. Kasabe,
102Director, Nodal Officer
Principal Scientist, Lead Centre Project Coordinator
Senior Scientist, Member
Sr. AO, Member
FAO, Member
AO, Member
AFAO, Member

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
IC A RCITIZEN'S/CLIENT'S CHARTER
ICAR -  Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology  
Adenwala Road, Matunga, Mumbai -  400 019.
Phone: (022) 24127273/76, 24184274/75, Fax: (022) 24130835  
Website:  http://www.circot.res.inISO 9001:2015
V IS IO N
Global Excellence in Cotton Technology
M IS S IO N
To provide scientific and managerial interventions to post-harvest processing and value 
addition to cotton and other natural fibres and utilization of their by-products to 
maximize economic, environmental and societal benefits.
MAIN SERVICES/TRANSACTIONS
Sr. No. Services/Transactions Responsible Persons
1. Commercial Testing: Fibre, Yarn, Fabric, Garment, 
Spinnability, Non-Lint Content, Linter, Seed, 
Paper, Board, Absorbent cotton, Chemical and 
Biochemical Tests of Textile Materials, ECO, SEM, 
XRD, etc.Mrs. P.S. Nirhali
Assistant Chief Technical Officer 
Incharge, Test House
test.circot@icar.gov.in , cottontest@rediff.com  
Phone Ext 456 / 457
2. Imparting Training to Stakeholders Dr. A.K. Bharimalla
Technology Transfer Division 
ashokbhari72@gmail.com  
Phone Ext 467
and
Dr. S.K. Shukla
Ginning Training Centre, Nagpur 
skshukla2000@gmail.com  
Phone (0712)2500592,2500289
3. Supply of Calibration Cotton Dr. P.K. Mandhyan
Quality Evaluation and Improvement Division
pkmandhyan@gmail.com
Phone Ext 447
4. Consultancy and Technology T ransfer Dr. A.K. Bharimalla
Technology Transfer Division 
ashokbhari72@gmail.com  
Phone Ext 467
Public Grievance Officer  
Shri Sunil Kumar , Senior Administrative officer 
Phone: 022-24127627, E-mail  sunkr2@rediffmail.com , Ext 138
For Further Information, Contact  
Dr. P.G. Patil , Director, ICAR-CIRCOT, Mumbai
103

ICAR-CIRCOT Annual Report 2020
I p H I  d T
v R l d l j  
RIG H T TO  
INFORMATION
5^KI d^?M
OUR MOTIVE
Wt^fTW W Wt ^fTW  W
To Promote Transparency To Promote Accountability
RRRTWT ^ W I T  ^f¥WMt, 2005 W  RtW T %^HWU| t  fW'MfH'fed ^f^WlP(di Wt f R
C\ 7 - O  T  C\
^ w k), RfTMW^WR^HT ^f^WTTt OTT '  yif^Wi^) '  W  ^M t  '  H iltd'  Iwmi '  *  IM I if1  Iy  C \
In Pursuance of the promulgation of Right to Information Act, 2005, the following Officers are  
designed as CPIO, Assistant CPIO and Appellate Authority at this Institute.
WrCm # W  R R W TT ^f^WTftC s
Central Public Information Officer
• o  ^-o ^
R ^ 'W m  ^TWFft, 
m. rt. ^ r. r. -  %. ^ . ^t. ^r. t .
C  N O  N O
E-mail :  director.circot@icar.gov.in  
:  sunil.kumar@iC?icarv?c^ v.in 
Tel :  2412 7627
:  2412 7273 / 76, 2418 4274 / 75 
FAX No. :  2413 0835 / 2415 7239
RfTMW WrC 'M HtW RRRT ^ W H T )C \
Assistant Central Public Information Officer
^ I t d l .  H d d T  WWfi• o
y^wfHR ^f^^r(t,
rt. r t. ^h. r. - % . ^. R t. ^h. r.
c  NO NO
E-mail :  director.circot@icar.gov.in  
:  sujata.koshy@icar.gov.in  
Tel :  2412 7273 / 76, 2418 4274 / 75 
FAX No. :  2413 0835 / 2415 7239^M^'M'RTf^WTT)'
Appellate Authority  
^T. M). ^ ) . M!d)d
Th^ir, m. r t. rr . r. - % . ^. Rt. rr. r.7 c  \0 no
E-mail :  director.circot@icar.gov.in  
Tel :  2414 6002
:  2412 7273 / 76, 2418 4274 / 75 
FAX No. :  2413 0835 / 2415 7239
104

te?<lh jsjaaw utta;'tqxw* I—I  ^TRcT 
^ F T  v * < | T y c 1 l c f ? T  3 ^^  tpgwf (I? 3 JI7
A q rts e a rc h w iih a  hum an touch

